

===== PAGE 1 =====
2012 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 2 =====
I am pleased to report that in 2012, IBM 
achieved record operating earnings per 
share, record free cash flow and record profit 
margins, with revenues that were flat at 
constant currency. Operating earnings per 
share were up 13 percent, putting us well  
on track to our 2015 Road Map objective of 
at least $20 of operating earnings per share. 
Importantly, we continued to deliver value  
to you, our owners. 
This performance is a testament to our strategic position and 
capabilities, the discipline of our management systems, and the 
dedication and expertise of more than 430,000 IBMers around 
the world. Importantly, it reflects the impact of a distinct choice 
we have made about IBM’s business and technology model. 
	
IBM is an innovation company. Both in what we do  
and in how we do it, we pursue continuous transformation —  
always remixing to higher value in our portfolio and skills,  
in the capabilities we deliver to our clients and in our own 
operations and management practices. 
	
This is not the only path to success in our industry,  
and it is not the easiest one. But it is ours. In this letter, I will 
report on our 2012 results, and then put them in context  
of our model of continuous transformation.
Results in 2012
Earnings per share: Diluted operating earnings per share  
in 2012 were $15.25, a new record. This marked 10 straight 
years of double-digit EPS growth.
Margins: IBM’s operating pre-tax income margin rose  
for the 10th consecutive year — to 22.2 percent, up 12 points 
since 2000.
Cash flow: IBM has consistently generated strong cash  
flow, a key indicator of real business performance. In 2012 
our free cash flow was $18.2 billion, a record for IBM and 
$12 billion higher than a decade ago. We ended 2012 with 
$11.1 billion of cash and marketable securities.
Revenue and income: Our revenue in 2012 was  
$104.5 billion, down 2 percent as reported and flat  
at constant currency. We grew operating net income  
by 8 percent, to $17.6 billion, our highest ever.
Investment and return to shareholders: In 2012 we invested 
$3.7 billion for 11 acquisitions in key areas of software  
and services; $4.3 billion in net capital expenditures; and 
$6.3 billion in R&D. We were able to return $15.8 billion to 
you — $12 billion through share repurchases and $3.8 billion 
through dividends. Last year’s dividend increase was  
13 percent, marking the 17th year in a row in which we  
have raised our dividend, and the 97th consecutive year  
in which we have paid one.
	
Since 2000, we have added $14.6 billion to IBM’s 
operating pre-tax profit base, and increased our pre-tax 
income 1.7 times, our operating earnings per share  
3.6 times and our free cash flow 1.7 times. Cumulatively,  
we have generated about $150 billion of free cash flow.
IBM’s Model: Continuous Transformation
In an industry characterized by a relentless cycle of 
innovation and commoditization, one model for success  
is that of the commodity player — winning through low 
Dear IBM Investor:
1
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 3 =====
2
price, efficiency and economies of scale. Ours is a  
different choice: the path of innovation, reinvention  
and shift to higher value. 
We remix to higher value: We do so in our portfolio,  
in our organic R&D investment, and through targeted 
acquisitions and divestitures. 
• We remix our research and development: Two decades ago, 
70 percent of our researchers were working in materials 
science, hardware and related technology. Even the 
one-in-ten working in software were focused on  
operating systems and compilers. Today, 60 percent  
are in fields that support our key growth initiatives,  
such as the 400 mathematicians developing algorithms 
for business analytics, as well as a diverse group of 
specialists that include medical doctors, computational 
biologists, experts in natural language processing, and 
weather and climate forecasters. Since the beginning of 
2010, we have spent $19 billion on R&D, and in 2012 
IBM earned the most U.S. patents for the 20th straight 
year, with a record total of 6,478. 
• We acquire new capabilities: Organizations run into 
trouble when they look to fulfill a new strategy or provide 
the basis for transformation through acquisitions. We 
practice a disciplined approach that asks three questions: 
Does it build on or extend a capability IBM already has? 
Does the company have scalable intellectual property? 
Can it take advantage of our reach into 170 countries? 
Our balanced formula has built a strong track record since 
2000, with more than 140 acquisitions. 
• We divest nonstrategic assets: Always moving to the future 
isn’t just about what you invent. It also involves  
choices about when to move on. Over the past decade  
we have divested almost $15 billion of annual revenue —  
businesses that no longer fit our strategy. If we had  
not done so, we would be a larger company today,  
but with lower margins and capabilities less essential  
to our clients.
2012 Performance
($ in billions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
Operating earnings per share
$  15.25
Revenue
$104.50
Operating net income
$  17.60
Free cash flow
$  18.20
Returned to shareholders
$  15.80
We make markets: We create new markets by category,  
by geography and by client. 
• We make markets by category: Our software and  
services businesses today look very different from just  
a few years ago, offering new solution categories like 
MobileFirst, Social Business and Smarter Commerce.  
In our hardware business, momentum is building for  
our new PureSystems family, which launched the new 
category of workload-optimized systems. PureSystems 
has seen more than 2,300 installations in more than  
70 countries in just two quarters. 
• We make markets by geography: We are achieving  
strong results in the world’s growth markets, working 
closely with businesses, institutions and governments  
as they seek to modernize their infrastructures and 
societies. We opened 144 new branches in these markets  
in 2012. We also continue remixing to more profitable 
opportunities in these countries, through Smarter Planet 
solutions such as Smarter Transportation, Smarter 
Finance and Smarter Cities.


===== PAGE 4 =====
• We make markets by client: We unlock new opportunity 
within our existing client base by creating capabilities  
for a new generation of IT buyers — from chief marketing 
officer to chief financial officer to the head of human 
resources and more. I discuss this in greater depth below.
We reinvent core franchises: Our System z enterprise 
server, introduced in 2012, is just the latest reinvention  
of the mainframe, and it drove System z’s largest capacity 
shipment ever during the fourth quarter — with more  
than half of that growth coming from Linux workloads. 
Core software platforms such as WebSphere have been 
entirely transformed. And Information Technology 
Services, which was once a significant reseller of others’ 
technology — generating good revenue but low margins —  
has shifted significantly to high-value services such  
as data center energy efficiency, security, and business 
continuity and recovery. This has contributed to a  
6-point pre-tax income margin improvement in services 
since 2000.
We remix our skills and expertise: An innovation model 
means continuously remixing and deepening our expertise. 
For example, over the past three years we have increased  
our skill base in analytics by more than 8,100 experts.  
We have also added nearly 9,500 sellers in key areas of 
industry expertise — such as healthcare, energy, telecom  
and banking, as well as emerging sectors such as metals  
and mining. This year, IBM Global Business Services and 
IBM Research will launch the IBM Client Experience  
Lab, as well as joint GBS and Software practices in social 
business and mobility — including a tripling of our skill  
base in social and mobile technologies and doubling our 
skill base in Smarter Commerce. 
We reinvent the enterprise itself: We have been highly 
disciplined about driving productivity — through the 
adoption of common, shared operations and systems; the 
streamlining of enterprise-wide processes; and the leveraging 
of global skills — all in the service of global integration.  
And we are now taking the next step, becoming a Smarter 
Enterprise: 
• In part, this means applying analytics to every part of our 
business — changing how we manage risk, drive efficiency, 
increase marketing effectiveness and infuse business  
insight across the company. 
• In part, it means using social technologies to identify  
IBM experts and enable them to deliver their knowledge 
and leverage our entire portfolio to create a seamless, 
high-value client experience. 
This ongoing transformation gives us confidence that  
we will achieve our goal of $8 billion in productivity  
savings over the course of our 2015 Road Map. Sixty  
percent of our productivity savings are reinvested  
in the business. 
Revenue Increase for IBM Growth Initiatives in 2012
For the year ended December 31:
2012
Smarter Planet
25%
Business Analytics
13%
Cloud
80%
Growth Markets
7%*
* at constant currency
We use our strong cash flow strategically: Our cash flow 
generation fuels reinvestment in the business — in R&D, 
capital expenditures and acquisitions. At the same time,  
we deliver consistently strong returns to you, our owners.
3
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 5 =====
4
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer 


===== PAGE 6 =====
A New Era of Computing
To sustain an innovation model in our industry, a company 
must do more than accommodate major technology shifts.  
It must lead them. IBM has done this repeatedly over the  
past century — not only pioneering new technology models,  
but capturing significant economic value. 
	
Today, another new wave is sweeping in — powered  
by Big Data, analytics, mobile, social and cloud. We 
anticipated this several years ago with our point of view  
on building a Smarter Planet — a world that was becoming 
instrumented, interconnected and intelligent. Now, the  
IT environment is moving from monolithic applications  
to dynamic services; from structured data at rest to  
unstructured data in motion; from PCs to unprecedented 
numbers and kinds of devices; from stable to unpredictable 
workloads; from static infrastructure to cloud services;  
and from proprietary standards to open innovation.
	
This shift plays strongly to IBM’s historic position  
in enterprise computing. So we are, as we have so often  
done in the past, reshaping our investment, innovation  
and market strategies to lead.
	
We see three defining characteristics of this new era —  
what we call Smarter Computing: 
1. Smarter Computing is designed for Big Data. Every  
two days, as much data is now generated as in all of human 
history up to 2003. This is “Big Data,” and it constitutes  
a vast new natural resource that can revolutionize industries 
and societies — with the right technology, capable of 
analyzing and extracting value and insight from it. This is  
one reason IBM’s analytics business is growing so strongly, 
as we work with clients to drive intelligence into every 
aspect of their operations. Indeed, we have raised our 2015 
Road Map target for Business Analytics from $16 billion to 
$20 billion of revenue. We are also rapidly advancing  
the market­place applications for our breakthrough 
“cognitive” computing system, Watson, which is  
already demonstrating its potential to transform healthcare  
and finance. We will introduce our first commercial 
Watson offerings this year. 
To sustain an innovation  
model in our industry,  
a company must do more  
than accommodate  
major technology shifts. 
2. Smarter Computing is built on software-defined  
environments. To handle today’s volume, velocity and variety 
of data, enterprise data centers must become more dynamic 
and flexible. One way to think about this is to imagine entire 
IT infrastructures that are as programmable as individual 
systems. This new model is known as the “software-defined 
environment,” and cloud computing is its first manifestation. 
However, it will not be the last. This new model optimizes 
the entire computing “stack” — compute, storage and network 
resources — so that it can adapt to the type of work required. 
Hardware built for these new environments will be of 
significant business value — exemplified by IBM’s systems 
today. From System z, to Power Systems, to storage, to our 
new PureSystems family, IBM systems are software-defined. 
5
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 7 =====
6
3. Smarter Computing is open. Only through open 
standards and platforms can enterprises support an 
expanding universe of heterogeneous data, devices and 
services, and engage in today’s rich innovation eco­systems. 
The challenge is how to turn open approaches into 
successful business. IBM helped do so with Linux, Eclipse 
and Apache, supporting their growth into standards with  
vital industry ecosystems, and then developing high- 
value IBM business on top of them. Today, we are repeating 
this strategy through a number of collaborations such as 
OpenStack, a new open source cloud platform; Hadoop,  
an open source platform for Big Data; and several promising 
open source hardware projects. 
	
Taken together, computing that is open, software-
defined, and designed for Big Data constitutes a profound 
shift in information technology. And as in prior such  
shifts, it will create new markets and new clients. We are 
pursuing them aggressively.
New Clients, New Markets
As I mentioned, to capture the opportunities opened up by 
this new era of technology, IBM is engaging with new kinds 
of clients as we make new markets in Big Data/analytics, 
cloud for the enterprise, emerging economies and Smarter 
Planet. Indeed, from a business perspective, Smarter Planet 
is a platform for a growing array of new markets — such as 
Smarter Commerce, Smarter Cities and Social Business —  
and these new markets take concrete shape through the 
engagement and enablement of a new generation of IT 
clients. Today, we are working around the world and across 
multiple industries with many new leaders. 
	
Perhaps the most active among them in embracing the 
new era of technology have been chief marketing officers, 
who are looking to reinvent the practice of marketing —  
for example, by understanding and enabling customers  
as individuals, rather than “segments.” This helped  
our Global Business Services Smarter Commerce  
signings grow by nearly 200 percent in 2012 — reaching  
$2 billion. 
	
At the same time, chief procurement officers are 
expected to increase their annual investment in Supplier 
Intelligence by 30 percent through 2015, as they reshape 
their global supply chains. And leaders of human resources 
are investing in analytics to build smarter workforces and 
social enterprises. One analyst has ranked IBM as number 
one in enterprise social business for the past three years.
 “Front-office” transformation  
has the potential to fuel  
the biggest wave of business 
technology investment  
since the era of enterprise  
resource planning.
City mayors are deploying Intelligent Operations Centers  
to transform public services in Davao, Philippines;  
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; and Miami-Dade County, Florida.  
And urban transportation managers, such as those in 
Singapore and Eindhoven, Netherlands, are reducing  
urban congestion by offering drivers alternate route 


===== PAGE 8 =====
	
The era opening before us offers a historic opportunity 
for both businesses and societies to pursue this higher 
purpose. A vast new natural resource is being unleashed —  
promising to do for our century what steam, electricity  
and fossil fuels did for the Industrial Age. The economic and 
societal potential of this new gusher of data is incalculable.  
It is the opportunity of our lifetime — and IBMers are 
determined to seize it.
	
It is in this spirit that I express my deep pride in the 
worldwide IBM team for bringing us to where we are, and  
my gratitude to you, our shareholders, for your unwavering 
support. I hope you share our excitement about your 
company’s performance and the way in which IBMers are 
building a smarter planet and a brighter future.
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
recommendations in exchange for their cars’ data on  
braking, acceleration and location. 
	
This list could go on. “Front-office” transformation  
has the potential to fuel the biggest wave of business 
technology investment since the era of enterprise resource 
planning (ERP). And that creates a powerful set of  
conditions for the tens of thousands of business advisors  
and industry experts embedded in the world’s greatest  
engine of technical innovation. 
	
In sum, our strong strategic positioning, solid balance 
sheet, recurring revenue, robust profit streams, global reach — 
and especially our institutional capacity for innovation  
and continuous transformation — give us confidence that we 
will continue to provide differentiating value to our clients, 
employees, partners and communities — and therefore  
to you, our owners. “Generating Higher Value at IBM”  
(pp. 8–15) summarizes how. 
On Being Essential
In closing, let me say a few words on the deeper meaning  
of this model of continuous transformation to higher value, 
at this particular moment in history. 
	
As I have noted, an innovation model does not present 
an easy path, especially in an industry as fast-changing  
as ours. But once you are clear on your choice, it shapes 
everything you do: your business strategy, how you recruit 
talent, how you develop skills, how you invent, how you  
run the company. And for IBM, it means something more. 
	
It speaks to IBMers’ aspiration to be essential to each  
of our vital constituencies — our clients, our communities, 
our partners, our investors, and one another. We see  
this as our purpose as an enterprise — to serve their plans  
for success, their need to transform and their own unique 
sense of purpose. 
This letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP financial measures that are made to 
facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance. For information 
about the company’s financial results related to (i) operating pre-tax income, operating pre-tax income 
margin and operating earnings per share and (ii) free cash flow, which are in each case non-GAAP 
measures, see the company’s Forms 8-K dated January 22, 2013 and February 28, 2013 (Attachment 
II—Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).
7
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 9 =====
8
Generating  
Higher Value at IBM
IBM is an innovation company. We pursue continuous transformation 
both in what we do and how we do it—always remixing to higher value  
in our offerings and skills, in our operations and management practices, 
and in the transformational capabilities we deliver to our clients.


===== PAGE 10 =====
IBM operations in more than 170 countries leverage the company’s 
global scale and expertise.
	
A globally integrated model allows us to focus resources  
on client-oriented work and enables rapid deployment of IBM 
capabilities to growth markets. In 2012, we continued our rapid 
geographic expansion—opening 144 branch offices. Our growth 
markets delivered more than 60 percent of our geographic  
gross profit growth between 2010 and 2012.
	
Global integration of all our major enterprise functions—from 
service delivery to marketing—has enabled IBM to deliver enterprise 
productivity savings while improving quality.
2. We have become a globally  
integrated enterprise to capture  
new growth and productivity.
Approaching 30% of geographic  
revenue from growth markets by 2015.
1. We continuously change our business  
mix toward higher-value, more profitable  
technologies and market opportunities.
Segment Pre-tax Income*
($ in billions)
About 50% of IBM segment profit  
expected to come from Software by 2015.
*	 Sum of external segment pre-tax income not equal to IBM pre-tax income. 
**	Excludes Enterprise Investments and not restated for stock-based compensation.  
2000 Segment PTI is reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation.
  Hardware/Financing   
  Services   
  Software
2000**
3.3
3.7
2.6
35%
38%
27%
3.3
9.9
10.8
14%
41%
45%
2012
Growth Markets Share of Geographic Revenue
24%
2011
2010
2009
2000*
2012
* Excluding divested businesses of PCs and printers.
2015 Road Map  
Each year IBM describes how the company manages its business 
and serves its shareholders in a detailed financial road map.
	
A long-term perspective ensures IBM is well positioned to take 
advantage of major shifts occurring in technology, business and  
the global economy.
22 %
21 %
19 %
11 %
9
Generating Higher Value at IBM


===== PAGE 11 =====
10
4
8
$20
16
12
0
00
12
18.2
6.7
10.1%
22.2%
Our operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income margin in 2012 was  
22.2 percent, 12 points higher than in 2000. The primary driver  
of this performance was gross profit margin expansion, as a result  
of the shift in our business mix to more profitable, higher-value 
segments and improved productivity.
	
At the same time, we’ve increased R&D investment. Since the 
beginning of 2000, we’ve spent $75 billion in R&D, enabling  
us to deliver key innovations and maintain U.S. patent leadership  
for our 20th consecutive year in 2012.
	
Our solid business model performance has resulted in 
consistently strong free cash flow. In 2012 our free cash flow  
was $18.2 billion, $12 billion higher than a decade ago.
3. By aligning our business model  
with our clients’ needs, we achieve  
our financial goals.
4. This allows us to invest in future  
sources of growth and provide strong 
returns to our shareholders.
Primary Uses of Cash Since the Beginning of 2000
($ in billions)
Free Cash Flow and Operating Pre-tax Income Margin*
($ in billions)
  Free Cash Flow
  Operating Pre-tax Income Margin
$237
Acquisitions
Dividends
Capital expenditures
Share repurchases (gross)
Acquisitions: Since the beginning of 2000, we have acquired  
more than 140 companies in strategic areas including analytics, 
cloud, security and Smarter Commerce. We expect to spend  
$20 billion in acquisitions over the 2015 Road Map period to  
support growth initiatives.
Capital Expenditures: We have invested more than $55 billion  
since 2000 to advance our capabilities.
Share Repurchase and Dividends: Since 2000, we have 
returned almost $150 billion to shareholders—paying $26 billion  
in dividends and reducing the outstanding share count by  
over 35 percent. We expect to return $70 billion to shareholders  
in our 2015 Road Map period—$50 billion through gross share 
repurchases and $20 billion in dividends.
$123
$26
$55
$33
  *	Excludes acquisition-related and nonoperating retirement-related charges. 
$ 70 billion expected to be returned  
to shareholders through 2015.


===== PAGE 12 =====
Our 2015 Road Map continues the drive to higher value— 
with the expectation of at least $20 operating (non-GAAP)  
EPS in 2015.
5. This delivers long-term value and  
performance for all key IBM stakeholders — 
investors, clients, employees and society.
  *	Excludes acquisition-related and nonoperating 
retirement-related charges. 
**	2000 and 2001 exclude Enterprise Investments 
and not restated for stock-based compensation. 
Sum of external segment pre-tax income not 
equal to IBM pre-tax income.
• Software becomes about  
half of segment profit 
• Growth markets  
approach 30 percent  
of geographic  revenue
• Generate $8 billion  
in productivity through  
enterprise transformation
• Return $70 billion  
to shareholders 
• Invest $20 billion  
in acquisitions
2000
2002
2010
2011
2012
2015
$13.44
$15.25
$11.67
$3.32
$1.81
Services
Software
Hardware / Financing
  Operating (non-GAAP) EPS*
Segment Pre-tax Income*, **
$ 20
At Least
Operating EPS*
Revenue Growth
A combination of base  
revenue growth, a shift  
to faster growing businesses  
and strategic acquisitions.
Share Repurchase
Leveraging our strong cash  
generation to return value  
to shareholders by reducing  
shares outstanding.
Operating Leverage
A shift to higher-margin 
businesses and enterprise  
productivity derived  
from global integration  
and process efficiencies.
Key Drivers for 2015 Road Map
Key 2015 Road Map Objectives:
11
Generating Higher Value at IBM


===== PAGE 13 =====
12
Designed for Data
As new sources of data continue to grow in volume, variety and 
velocity, so too does their potential to revolutionize the decision- 
making processes in every industry—if organizations can analyze  
it all and extract insight.
	
IBM has the world’s deepest portfolio of analytics solutions  
and software; 30,000 enterprise analytics engagements; a leading 
position in powerful optimized systems; and the business  
and industry expertise of 9,000 business analytics consultants, 
400 researchers and 9 analytics solution centers. We have acquired 
33 companies since 2005, including five in 2012, to build targeted 
analytics and information expertise—helping clients turn massive 
volumes of real-time, unstructured data into high-value knowledge 
available instantly.
The IT industry and the global economy have been transformed  
by massive amounts of data, new ways to deliver computing and  
the rise of mobile and social platforms.
Big Data is the planet’s new natural resource.  
Hundreds of billions of connected sensors and devices have  
created a massive, invisible flow of digital “1s” and “0s”—a global  
gusher of information.
Advanced analytics enable us to mine it. 
Enterprises and institutions are analyzing this flow of streaming, 
unstructured data and acting upon those insights in real time.
Cloud computing is coming of age.  
The model of computing known as “the cloud” delivers on-demand 
computing over the Internet. It brings new scale and efficiency to 
service delivery and enables more agile ways of doing business.
Social and mobile create a new platform for work. 
With devices in hand, individuals now expect to interact with  
the world around them—as consumers, as students, as citizens. 
For many, mobile devices have supplanted the PC, consumer 
electronics and even the wallet.
6. Five years ago, we saw the emergence  
of a Smarter Planet — a world becoming  
instrumented, interconnected and  
intelligent.
7. To lead this shift, IBM is pioneering a new 
computing model — what we call Smarter 
Computing. It has three core attributes.


===== PAGE 14 =====
Open and Collaborative
An expanding universe of mobile devices, networked services  
and social enterprises requires open platforms. IBM helped open 
platforms such as Linux, Eclipse and Apache become standards 
with vital industry ecosystems, and then we developed high- 
value businesses on top of them. Today, IBM collaborates broadly  
to support open platforms such as OpenStack and Hadoop.
	
IBM has been the market leader in social enterprise software*  
for the past three years. With thousands of mobile experts,  
270 patents in wireless innovations and 160 IBM Research 
scientists focused on mobile technologies, IBM has helped more 
than 1,000 clients become mobile enterprises. Looking ahead,  
we will integrate these capabilities with the powerful behavioral 
analytics of newly acquired Kenexa to help leaders of human 
resources build smarter workforces.
  *	IDC, “Worldwide Enterprise Social Software 2011 Vendor Shares,” June 2012.
Defined by Software
Entire IT environments can now be as simple, adaptable and 
programmable as individual systems are today—thanks to  
a new model known as the software-defined environment. 
Cloud is its first major manifestation—but it will not be the last. 
	
In a software-defined environment, networks, storage  
and servers, as well as software, can be tuned flexibly to  
a desired workload. Hardware systems optimized for these  
new environments—such as IBM’s System z mainframe,  
Power Systems, storage systems and our new PureSystems— 
are creating significant new business value.   
	
IBM’s SmartCloud manages 13 billion security events  
for more than 4,000 clients per day and connects more  
than 300,000 trading entities. IBM has also helped clients  
build more than 3,500 private clouds. 
13
Generating Higher Value at IBM


===== PAGE 15 =====
14
0176.980
Smarter City Operations 
The Philippines city of Davao’s 1.5 million  
citizens will be the first in Asia to benefit from  
an Intelligent Operations Center. It ties together 
data and operations of four agencies—crime 
prevention; emergency response; threat 
prevention and response; and traffic manage-
ment. Geolocation mapping, in combination  
with GPS-equipped task forces on the ground,  
will allow officials to analyze building, street  
and infrastructure data to substantially reduce 
response times. A new early warning system  
will monitor key risk indicators so agencies can 
take quick action before situations escalate.
Smarter Customer Retention
Pakistani telephone provider Ufone faced a 
challenge common to start-ups in emerging 
markets. After a period of rapid growth— 
reaching 24 million subscribers in less than  
a decade—it had to retain those customers  
in an increasingly competitive market. IBM 
analytics enabled it to scan call detail records  
in near-real time, flagging customers who fit  
the profile for a particular promotion. Today,  
by issuing offers customized to a user’s unique 
usage patterns, Ufone has doubled its  
campaign response rates.
Smarter Cancer Treatment
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center is 
working with IBM to use the cognitive computing 
capabilities found in IBM’s Watson to help doctors 
develop personalized, evidence-based cancer 
treatment options. The system uses insights 
gleaned from the deep experience of Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering’s world-renowned oncologists 
to provide individualized treatment options based 
on a patient’s medical information, the synthesis  
of a vast array of updated and vetted treatment 
guidelines, and published research. The result:  
a decision support system for physicians that 
will offer individualized, confidence-weighted 
treatment options for their patients.
In thousands of Smarter Planet client engagements, IBM is helping our clients seize 
competitive advantage, not only through improved productivity but by reframing their 
industry’s issues in unexpected, often counterintuitive ways.
Smarter Wind Energy 
Vestas, the world’s largest windmill manufacturer,  
is tapping into the power of an IBM supercomputer 
and Big Data analytics software to model past, 
present and future wind patterns—a process that 
involves huge amounts of data—to optimize the 
location and design of sites its customers are 
developing. Vestas’s system is on track to digest 
and analyze 20 petabytes of information in hours 
instead of months. The result: fewer customer 
power disruptions and more predictable revenues 
for utilities.
Smarter Stock Exchange
To compete with exchanges in places like 
London and New York, the Santiago Stock 
Exchange needed to handle the growing 
volume of high-frequency and algorithmic 
trading activity—and do so from the ground up. 
Working with IBM, it built a trade processing 
solution that increased capacity tenfold, cut 
latency to microseconds and enabled real-time 
fraud surveillance. The Exchange’s transaction 
volume is up 50 percent in the first year.
8. The infusion of digital intelligence into the world’s  
systems is changing the way people, organizations  
and entire industries approach what they do.


===== PAGE 16 =====
Accelerated Discovery  IBM researchers are unlocking data- 
driven “white spaces,” such as finding new uses for drugs already 
proven safe in the data of 15 million patents, 18 million scientific 
papers, 10 million chemical compounds and 100 million genes.  
Atomic-Scale Memory  IBM researchers have extended the 
frontiers of the unimaginably small by showing the possibility  
of storing a “bit” of memory on just 12 atoms. Such a break­through 
holds the potential to increase storage capacity one thousandfold.
Quantum Computing  IBM researchers have taken a step closer  
to a practical quantum computer, based not only on digital “1s”  
and “0s” but also on multiphased “qubits” that enable millions  
of computations at once. 
“Synapse” Chip  IBM researchers are now developing cognitive 
computer chips that learn without programming. Modeled on  
the human brain, they have already simulated more than 500 billion 
neurons and 100 trillion synapses.
For all its remarkable advances, computation in the past half- 
century—the era of “programmable” computers—has been 
limited to “yes/no” decisions. The new era now emerging  
will unlock far deeper understanding of the complexities and 
ambiguities of the real world—both natural and man-made. 
	
Doing so will require both steady incremental advances  
and true scientific breakthroughs that come only from deep, 
multidisciplinary research—such as that underway today  
in IBM’s labs.
Massive-Scale Analytics for Cybersecurity  IBM researchers 
have found cyber criminals hiding in billions of log files by surfacing 
small “tells” in the actions of attackers who elude even the most 
advanced virus detection. 
9. Looking ahead, IBM Research is probing  
the future of information technology.
“Generating Higher Value at IBM” includes selected references to certain non-GAAP financial measures that are made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance. For 
information about the company’s financial results related to (i) operating pre-tax income, operating pre-tax income margin and operating earnings per share and (ii) free cash flow for 2012, see the company’s Forms 
8-K dated on January 22, 2013 and February 28, 2013 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials). For information about the company’s financial results related to (i) growth markets share of geographic 
revenue excluding divested PCs and printers and (ii) free cash flow, in each case for 2000, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to the SEC on May 12, 2010 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).
15
Generating Higher Value at IBM


===== PAGE 17 =====
16
16
Financial Highlights 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Revenue
$104,507
$106,916
Net income
$  16,604
$  15,855
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  17,627
$  16,318
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    14.37
$    13.06
Basic
$    14.53
$    13.25
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* 
$    15.25
$    13.44
Net cash provided by operating activities
$  19,586
$  19,846
Capital expenditures, net
4,307
4,059
Share repurchases
11,995
15,046
Cash dividends paid on common stock
3,773
3,473
Per share of common stock
3.30
2.90
At December 31:
2012
2011
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
$  11,128
$  11,922
Total assets
119,213
116,433
Working capital
5,807
8,805
Total debt
33,269
31,320
Total equity
18,984
20,236
Common shares outstanding (in millions)
1,117
1,163
Market capitalization 
$214,032
$213,886 
Stock price per common share
$  191.55
$  183.88
Number of employees in IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries
434,246
433,362
* See page 38 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.


===== PAGE 18 =====
17
Report of Financials 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Discussion
Overview	
18
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements	
18
Management Discussion Snapshot	
 19
Description of Business	
21
Year in Review	
26
Prior Year in Review	
44
Other Information 	
55
	Looking Forward	
55
	Liquidity and Capital Resources	
56
	Critical Accounting Estimates	
59
	Currency Rate Fluctuations	
61
	Market Risk	
62
	Financing Risks	
62
	Employees and Related Workforce	
63
Global Financing	
63
Report of Management	
68
Report of Independent Registered  
	
Public Accounting Firm	
69
Consolidated Financial Statements
Earnings	
70
Comprehensive Income	
71
Financial Position	
72
Cash Flows	
73
Changes in Equity	
 74
Notes to Consolidated  
Financial Statements
	A	 Significant Accounting Policies	
 76
	B	 Accounting Changes	
86
	C 	Acquisitions/Divestitures	
87
	D 	Financial Instruments	
92
	E	 Inventories	
 98
	F	 Financing Receivables	
 99
	G	 Property, Plant and Equipment 	
 102
	H	 Investments and Sundry Assets	
102
	I	 Intangible Assets Including Goodwill	
102
	J	 Borrowings	
104
	K	 Other Liabilities	
106
	L	 Equity Activity	
107
	M	 Contingencies and Commitments	
110
	N	 Taxes	
113
	O	 Research, Development and Engineering	
115
	P	 Earnings Per Share of Common Stock	
116
	Q	 Rental Expense and Lease Commitments	
116
	R	 Stock-Based Compensation	
117
	S	 Retirement-Related Benefits	
120
	T	 Segment Information	
134
	U	 Subsequent Events	
138
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data	
139
Selected Quarterly Data	
140
Performance Graph	
141
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership	
142
Stockholder Information	
143


===== PAGE 19 =====
18
18
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Overview
The financial section of the International Business Machines 
Cor­por­ation (IBM or the company) 2012 Annual Report includes the 
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State­ments 
and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial State­ments. This 
Over­view is designed to provide the reader with some perspective 
regarding the information contained in the financial section.
Organization of Information
•	
The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers with 
an overview of the business and a narrative on the company’s 
financial results and certain factors that may affect its future 
prospects from the perspective of the company’s management. 
The “Management Discussion Snap­shot,” on pages 19 to 21, 
presents an overview of the key performance drivers in 2012.
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 26, the Manage­ment 
Discussion contains the results of operations for each reportable 
segment of the business and a discussion of the company’s finan-
cial position and cash flows. Other key sections within the 
Management Discussion include: “Looking Forward” on page 55, 
and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” on pages 56 through 58.
• Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a 
stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section is 
included beginning on page 63.
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on pages 
70 through 75. These statements provide an overview of the 
company’s income and cash flow performance and its financial 
position. 
•	
The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Among 
other items, the Notes contain the company’s accounting policies 
(pages 76 to 86), acquisitions and divestitures (pages 87 through 
91), detailed information on specific items within the financial 
statements, certain contingencies and commitments (pages 110 
to 113) and retirement-related benefits information (pages 120 
to 134).
•	
The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have been 
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States (GAAP).
•	
The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant cur-
rency” in the Management Discussion do not include operational 
impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency 
rates. Certain financial results are adjusted based on a simple 
mathematical model that translates current period results in local 
currency using the comparable prior year period’s currency con-
version rate. This approach is used for countries where the 
functional currency is the local country currency. This informa-
tion is provided so that certain financial results can be viewed 
without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, 
thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business 
performance. See “Currency Rate Fluctuations” on page 61 for 
additional information.
•	
Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual Report, 
certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded 
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages reported are 
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers.
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational results 
of the business, the company separates business results into oper-
ating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings is a 
non-GAAP measure that excludes the effects of certain acquisition-
related charges and retirement-related costs, and their related tax 
impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings exclude the amortiza-
tion of purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related 
charges such as in-process research and development, transac-
tion costs, applicable restructuring and related expenses and tax 
charges related to acquisition integration. For retirement-related 
costs, the company characterizes certain items as operating and 
others as non-operating. The company includes defined benefit plan 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plan service cost, amortiza-
tion of prior service cost and the cost of defined contribution plans in 
operating earnings. Non-operating retirement-related cost includes 
defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan 
interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortized actuarial 
gains/losses, the impacts of any plan curtailments/settlements and 
multi-employer plan costs, pension insolvency costs and other 
costs. Non-operating costs are primarily related to changes in pen-
sion plan assets and liabilities which are tied to financial market 
performance and the company considers these costs to be outside 
the operational performance of the business. 
	
Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a view 
of operating earnings as described above provides increased trans-
parency and clarity into both the operational results of the business 
and the performance of the company’s pension plans; improves 
visibility to management decisions and their impacts on operational 
performance; enables better comparison to peer companies; and 
allows the company to provide a long-term strategic view of the 
business going forward. For its 2015 earnings per share road map, 
the company is utilizing an operating view to establish its objectives 
and track its progress. The company’s reportable segment financial 
results reflect operating earnings, consistent with the company’s 
management and measurement system. 
Forward-Looking and  
Cautionary Statements
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute 
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private 
Secur­ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking state-
ment in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it is 
made; the company assumes no obligation to update or revise any 
such statements. Forward-looking statements are based on the 
company’s current assumptions regarding future business and 
financial performance; these statements, by their nature, address 
matters that are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking 
statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors 
that could cause actual results to be materially different, as discussed 
more fully elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s 
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), includ-
ing the company’s 2012 Form 10-K filed on February 26, 2013.


===== PAGE 20 =====
19
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Discussion Snapshot
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$104,507
$106,916
(2.3)%*
Gross profit margin
48.1%
46.9%
1.2 pts.
Total expense and other income
$  28,396
$  29,135
(2.5)%
Total expense and other  
income-to-revenue ratio
27.2%
27.3%
(0.1)pts.
Income before income taxes
$  21,902
$  21,003
4.3%
Provision for income taxes
  5,298
  5,148
2.9%
Net income
$  16,604
$  15,855
4.7%
Net income margin
  15.9%
14.8%
1.1 pts.
Earnings per share  
of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    14.37
$    13.06
10.0%
Weighted-average shares 
outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,155.4
1,213.8
(4.8)%
Assets**
$119,213
$116,433
2.4%
Liabilities**
$100,229
$  96,197
4.2%
Equity**
$  18,984
$  20,236
(6.2)%
  * 0.0 percent adjusted for currency.
** At December 31.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for 2012 and 2011.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$16,604
$15,855 
4.7%
Non-operating adjustments 
(net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
641
495
29.5
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
381
(32)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$17,627
$16,318
8.0%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share
$  15.25
$  13.44
13.5%
NM—Not meaningful
* See page 38 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
In 2012, the company reported revenue of $104.5 billion, expanded 
gross, pre-tax and net income margins, and delivered diluted 
earnings per share growth of 10.0 percent as reported and 13.5 
percent on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. This was the 10th 
consecutive year of double-digit earnings per share growth for 
the company. The company generated $19.6 billion in cash from 
operations, and $18.2 billion in free cash flow driving shareholder 
returns of $15.8 billion in gross common stock repurchases and 
dividends. The free cash flow performance in 2012 was $12.3 
billion greater than the company generated in 2002. The financial 
results demonstrate the strength and flexibility of the company’s 
business model, which is designed to deliver profit and cash on 
a sustained basis.
	
The company continued to deliver value to its clients and capitalize 
on key trends in 2012. The company had strong performance in busi-
ness analytics, cloud and Smarter Planet—key growth initiatives that 
leverage the software portfolio and contribute to margin expansion. 
Within the growth markets, the company continued to expand its capa-
bilities and build out IT infrastructures in emerging markets. In 2012, the 
growth markets revenue growth rate at constant currency outpaced 
the major markets by 8 points. The company continues to invest 
for innovation and technological leadership. These investments 
supported the introduction of the new System z mainframe, stor-
age and POWER7+ products in hardware, as well as a series of 
major launches across software that included more than 400 new or 
upgraded product announcements. The introduction of PureSystems, 
a new category of expert integrated systems, brings together hardware 
and software and provides built-in expertise to deliver a more efficient 
and effective solution to the company’s clients. In addition, the company 
was awarded more U.S. patents in 2012 than any other company for 
the 20th consecutive year, with many of the patents this year in key 
areas such as business analytics, Big Data, cybersecurity, cloud, mobile, 
social networking and software-defined environments. The company 
also continued to add to its capabilities to support the growth initiatives 
by acquiring 11 companies in 2012—investing approximately $4 billion. 
At the same time, the company divested its Retail Store Solutions 
(RSS) business as it focused the Smarter Commerce portfolio on higher 
value, intellectual property-based opportunities. Throughout the 
year, the company continued the transformation of the business—
shifting to higher value areas and improving its structure—resulting 
in a higher quality revenue stream and margin expansion.
	
Segment performance was led by Software which increased 
revenue 2.0 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key 
branded middleware which increased 2.9 percent (5 percent adjusted 
for currency). Global Services revenue decreased 2.3 percent as 
reported, but was up 0.4 percent on a constant currency basis. 
Global Services revenue performance was led by the growth markets 
which were up 4.8 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and now 
represents more than 20 percent of total Global Services revenue. 
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 6.9 percent; adjusting 
for the divested RSS business, revenue declined 5.1 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency). The company’s new mainframe was well 
received in the market, with System z revenue increasing 5.4 percent 
(6 percent adjusted for currency) versus the prior year. Global 
Financing revenue decreased 4.2 percent as reported, 1 percent 
on a constant currency basis, compared to the prior year. 
	
Across all of the segments, the company continued to have 
strong performance in its key growth initiatives. These are not stand-
alone offerings; they are integrated into the overall client offerings 
and are included in the financial results of the segments. In the 
growth markets, revenue increased 4.2 percent (7 percent adjusted 
for currency) year to year and represented 24 percent of total geo-
graphic revenue, an increase of 8 points since 2006. The company 
has been successful in capturing the opportunity in these faster 
growing markets. The company’s business analytics initiative 
continues to expand. The company has made significant strides 
and expanded its leadership in a number of strategic areas 


===== PAGE 21 =====
20
20
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
including Risk Management, Price and Promotion Optimization and 
Sales Performance Management. The value proposition in busi-
ness analytics uniquely leverages the integration between the 
software portfolio and the Global Business Services (GBS) con-
sulting expertise. In 2012, business analytics revenue increased 13 
percent compared to the prior year, led by the GBS consulting prac-
tice. Within cloud computing, the company’s SmartCloud portfolio 
addresses the full scope of enterprise client requirements. In 2012, 
the company continued to see strong demand for the foundational 
offerings in hardware and software that help clients build and run 
their private clouds, as well as for cloud-based solutions, like the 
company’s Software as a Service (SaaS) offerings. With strong 
global growth, cloud revenue for 2012 increased 80 percent com-
pared to the prior year. The Smarter Planet growth initiative expanded 
significantly in the past year—measured in terms of offerings, mar-
kets, clients and revenue performance. Clients are leveraging the 
company’s growing capabilities in areas like: Smarter Commerce, 
Social Business and Smarter Cities, and in next generation systems, 
like Watson, which are helping clients with their complex challenges. 
For the year, Smarter Planet solutions generated revenue growth of 
over 25 percent versus the prior year. Overall, within the offerings in 
business analytics, cloud and Smarter Planet, approximately half of 
the revenue is software. Therefore, as these offerings become a 
larger percentage of total revenue, they are driving the higher quality 
revenue stream and improved mix and margins. 
	
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 1.2 points 
versus 2011 to 48.1 percent. This was the ninth consecutive year of 
improvement in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP) 
gross margin of 48.7 percent increased 1.5 points compared to the 
prior year. The increase in gross margin in 2012 was driven by margin 
improvements in Software and both Global Services segments, and 
an improved revenue mix driven by Software. 
	
Total expense and other income decreased 2.5 percent in 2012 
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other 
income decreased 3.9 percent compared to the prior year. The year-
to-year drivers were approximately:
	
	
Total 	
Operating 
	
	
Consolidated 	
 (non-GAAP)
•	
Currency* 	
(5) points	
(5) points
•	
Acquisitions**	
3  points	
2  points
•	
Base expense	
(0) points	
(2) points
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
Pre-tax income grew 4.3 percent and the pre-tax margin was 
21.0 percent, an increase of 1.3 points versus 2011. Net income 
increased 4.7 percent and the net income margin was 15.9 percent, 
an increase of 1.1 points versus 2011. The effective tax rate for 2012 
was 24.2 percent compared with 24.5 percent in the prior year. 
Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income grew 7.3 percent and the 
operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was 22.2 percent, an increase 
of 2.0 points versus the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) net income 
increased 8.0 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) net income 
margin of 16.9 percent increased 1.6 points versus the prior year. 
The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 24.0 percent 
versus 24.5 percent in 2011. 
	
Diluted earnings per share improved 10.0 percent year to year 
reflecting the growth in net income and the benefits of the common 
stock repurchase program. In 2012, the company repurchased 
approximately 61 million shares of its common stock. Diluted earn-
ings per share of $14.37 increased $1.31 from the prior year. Operating 
(non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $15.25 increased $1.81 
versus 2011 driven by the following factors:
•	
Revenue decrease at actual rates	
$	(0.30)
•	
Margin expansion	
$	1.38
•	
Common stock repurchases	
$	0.73
At December 31, 2012, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity 
positions remained strong and were well positioned to support the 
company’s objectives. Cash and marketable securities at year end 
was $11,128 million. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash 
flows are highlighted below.
	
Total assets increased $2,780 million ($3,242 million adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2011 driven by: 
•	
Increases in total receivables ($3,053 million), goodwill 
($3,034 million), marketable securities ($717 million) and 
intangible assets ($395 million), partially offset by
•	
Decreases in prepaid pension assets ($1,899 million), cash 
and cash equivalents ($1,511 million) and prepaid expenses 
and other current assets ($1,224 million).
Total liabilities increased $4,032 million ($4,511 million adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2011 driven by:
•	
Increased retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit 
obligations ($2,044 million), total debt ($1,949 million),  
taxes ($1,635 million) and total deferred income ($399 million), 
partially offset by
•	
Decreases in other liabilities ($1,389 million) and accounts 
payable ($565 million). 
Total equity of $18,984 million decreased $1,252 million from 
December 31, 2011 as a result of:
•	
Increased treasury stock ($12,168 million) driven by share repur-
chases and increased losses in accumulated other comprehensive 
income/(loss) of ($3,874 million) driven by pension remeasurements, 
partially offset by
•	
Higher retained earnings ($12,783 million) and common stock 
($1,980 million). 
The company generated $19,586 million in cash flow provided by 
operating activities, a decrease of $260 million when compared to 
2011, primarily driven by a decrease in cash due to receivables 
($1,290 million) and an increased use of cash for accounts payable 
($675 million), partially offset by a decrease in net taxes paid ($999 
million) and the increase in net income ($749 million). Net cash used 
in investing activities of $9,004 million was $4,608 million higher than 
2011, primarily due to an increase in cash used of $2,719 million 
associated with net purchases and sales of marketable securities 


===== PAGE 22 =====
21
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
and other investments, increased cash used for acquisitions ($1,911 
million) and increased net capital investments ($248 million), partially 
offset by increased cash from divestitures ($585 million). Net cash 
used in financing activities of $11,976 million was $1,719 million lower, 
compared to 2011, primarily due to lower cash used for common 
stock repurchases ($3,051 million), partially offset by lower cash 
provided by common stock transactions ($914 million) and increased 
dividend payments ($300 million).
	
In January 2013, the company disclosed that it is expecting 
GAAP earnings of at least $15.53 and operating (non-GAAP) earn-
ings of at least $16.70 per diluted share for the full year 2013.
	
For additional information and details, see the “Year in Review” 
section on pages 26 through 43. For additional information regard-
ing 2002 free cash flow, see the company’s Form 8-K filed with the 
SEC on January 22, 2013.
Description of Business
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with 
the SEC on February 26, 2013 for a more detailed version of this 
Des­cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
	
The company creates business value for clients and solves 
business problems through integrated solutions that leverage 
information technology and deep knowledge of business processes. 
IBM solutions typically create value by reducing a client’s operational 
costs or by enabling new capabilities that generate revenue. These 
solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio of consulting, 
delivery and implementation services, enterprise software, systems 
and financing. 
Strategy
Despite the volatility of the information technology (IT) industry over 
the past decade, IBM has consistently delivered strong perfor-
mance, with a steady track record of sustained earnings per share 
growth and cash generation. The company has shifted its business 
mix, exiting certain segments while increasing its presence in 
higher-value areas such as services, software and integrated 
solutions. As part of this shift, the company has acquired more 
than 140 companies since 2000, complementing and scaling its 
portfolio of products and offerings.
	
IBM’s strategy of delivering high value solutions to enterprise 
clients has yielded consistent business results. Working with enter-
prise clients across the full spectrum of their business and 
technical opportunities, IBM delivers leadership innovation in tech-
nology, high value solutions and insights that improve client and 
industry outcomes. A highly engaged, global workforce with deep 
technical and business skills, teamed with an unmatched eco­
system of partners provides a world-class client experience.
	
These priorities reflect a broad shift in client spending toward 
innovation and efficiency, as companies seek higher levels of busi-
ness value from their IT investments. IBM has been able to deliver 
this enhanced client value thanks to its industry expertise, under-
standing of clients’ businesses, sustained investment in core and 
applied research and development (R&D), global reach and the 
breadth and depth of the company’s capabilities.
	
New types of solutions, new market opportunities and new deci-
sion makers are emerging as clients look to make use of technology 
to generate innovation and competitive advantage. These opportuni-
ties are driven by a new era of computing that is enabled by 
analytics, cloud computing, Big Data, mobility, social computing 
and supported by enterprise grade security solutions. The com-
pany’s strategy is to establish leadership in this new era of smarter 
computing—computing that is designed for Big Data, built on soft-
ware-defined environments and open—in order to enhance the 
value we deliver, create new markets and engage new clients.
	
To capture the opportunities arising from these market trends, 
IBM is focused on four key growth initiatives: Smarter Planet, Growth 
Markets, Business Analytics and Optimization and Cloud Comput-
ing. Each initiative represents a significant growth opportunity with 
attractive profit margins for IBM.
Smarter Planet
Smarter Planet is IBM’s vision of a technology-enabled world that 
is more instrumented, interconnected and intelligent than ever 
before, enabling people and organizations to tackle significant busi-
ness and societal challenges. At the heart of this vision is the 
opportunity for meaningful innovation—exploring and extending the 
boundaries of businesses, industries and communities. It’s about 
helping the company’s clients become better at what they do for 
their clients. IBM’s strategy is to accelerate progress toward a 
“smarter planet” by equipping clients with the advanced, integrated 
capabilities they need to thrive in this exciting new world that is 
unfolding before us—capabilities such as analytics for business and 
physical systems, business process management, social business, 
mobile computing and cloud computing.
	
IBM has continued to deepen its commitment to understanding 
and delivering on the promise of Smarter Planet for both line of 
business and IT executives across a broad range of industries. An 
industry-based approach is central to the strategy, since every 
industry confronts a distinct set of challenges and opportunities in 
today’s constantly transforming world. Whether “smarter” means 
helping a hospital group to deliver improved healthcare, a local gov-
ernment to ease traffic congestion, or a retail chain to execute a 
successful cross-channel campaign, IBM is aggressively developing 
and investing in a portfolio of industry solutions that helps these 
clients achieve their goals.
	
Three initiatives that drive significant value illustrate IBM’s deep 
commitment to building a smarter planet: Smarter Commerce, 
Smarter Cities and Social Business. IBM’s Smarter Commerce model 
integrates and transforms how companies manage and adapt their 
buy, market, sell and service processes, placing the customer 
squarely at the center of their business. IBM’s Smarter Cities initiative 
enables federal, state and local governments to make smarter deci-
sions, anticipate issues and coordinate resources more effectively, 
while delivering citizen-centric services that underpin sustainable 
economic growth. IBM’s Social Business initiative helps clients inte-
grate social technologies and practices into their front-end processes 
to more effectively create and share knowledge to accelerate innova-
tion, improve customer service, and build a smarter workforce. Each 
of these initiatives is powered by market-leading IBM innovations and 
software, developed both by IBM and through acquisitions.


===== PAGE 23 =====
22
22
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Growth Markets
The company has benefited from its investments over the past sev-
eral years in the growth markets. The focus now is on geographic 
expansion of IBM’s presence; on selected industries of the highest 
impact and opportunity; on countries’ build-outs of infrastructure 
aligned with their national agendas; and, on creating markets and 
new business models to serve the different requirements that exist 
in these emerging countries. The company’s effort in developing 
new growth markets within the African continent is a good example 
of this focus. Many of these initiatives are leading-edge, both in tech-
nologies and business models, and are delivering both increased 
revenue and margin expansion.
 	
In order to support this growth, IBM continues to invest signifi-
cantly in these markets to expand capacity, to develop talent and to 
deepen its R&D capabilities on the ground. At the same time, IBM 
continues to leverage talent across the growth markets under its 
globally integrated enterprise model to the benefit of both its clients 
and the company worldwide.
Business Analytics and Optimization
Business Analytics and Optimization (BAO) is the category of soft-
ware, systems and services that help organizations take advantage 
of all the data available to them for better and faster decision making 
and process optimization. This includes data that is being labeled 
“Big Data,” which is data of extreme volume, data being generated 
at a high velocity, and newer varieties of data like blogs, tweets, 
pictures, videos, unstructured text created by the explosion of social 
media websites and the instrumentation of nearly everything. BAO 
is core to achieving a smarter planet, helping leaders of this new 
information-centric and insight-driven world infuse intelligence into 
their business processes.
	
Smarter Analytics is IBM’s unique offering for the BAO category. 
With Smarter Analytics and the company’s deep expertise, IBM 
can help organizations: 1) grow, retain and satisfy customers 
through deep insight on individual customers and similar segments; 
2) increase operational efficiency through, for example, supply 
chain optimization, predictive maintenance, fraud reduction and 
optimization of sales incentives and compensation; 3) transform 
their financial processes such as planning, budgeting, forecasting, 
financial consolidation, regulatory filing and financial reporting; and 
4) better manage risk and regulatory compliance. 
	
The company’s approach to analytics is to ensure clients have 
complete end-to-end solutions across industries and functional 
focus areas like finance, sales, marketing, operations and risk. These 
solutions are designed to help organizations: 1) align around all their 
data—both traditional and big data—and establish a strong informa-
tion foundation; 2) apply analytics to their data so they can anticipate 
and shape business outcomes, identify patterns and gain insights 
into future performance; 3) enable workers on the front lines who 
collectively make thousands and even millions of decisions daily with 
insight that is immediately actionable so they can make the best 
possible decision—decisions like what claims to fast track in an 
insurance call center, or what offer is the best for each individual 
customer who calls a call center; and 4) create a culture that takes 
action on analytics and that truly transforms. 
	
IBM is committed to continually innovating across the spectrum 
of analytic capabilities, systems, research, services, deployment and 
skills. For example, in 2012, the game changing innovations in 
Watson were applied to Healthcare and Financial Services, analytic 
research like the ground-breaking work being done on temporal 
causal modeling and visualization, and investments in analytic skills 
and deployment ability in our new Analytics research centers in 
Columbus, Ohio and Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Cloud Computing
Cloud is a model for consuming and delivering business and IT 
services. It can deliver significant economies, enable new levels of 
speed, flexibility and agility and even serve as a transformative plat-
form for business innovation. From a business perspective, cloud 
computing is reshaping industry ecosystems, invigorating product 
innovation and enabling new business models that leverage new 
sources of competitive differentiation. From an IT perspective, cloud 
offers improved access to and utilization of information technology 
through use of highly efficient virtualization and management tech-
nology, consumer-style user interfaces and ubiquitous connectivity, 
including via mobile technologies.
	
IBM has already helped thousands of its clients adopt and lever-
age cloud computing through its broad portfolio of IBM SmartCloud 
products, solutions and services. Organizations moving beyond initial 
exploration of cloud computing seek solutions that align with their 
specific needs. IBM’s breadth of cloud capabilities gives it a unique 
ability to help clients exploit the advantages of cloud. IBM has cloud 
solutions that span infrastructure, platform, applications and busi-
ness process services all geared to enable clients to drive significant 
business value through the rapid adoption and exploitation of new 
cloud capabilities. IBM’s expert consulting, breakthrough technolo-
gies and a portfolio of cloud-based services are squarely focused 
on the requirements of the enterprise.
	
The company offers a full array of cloud delivery models, includ-
ing private clouds, public clouds and a hybrid of both. IBM helps 
build out private, on-premises cloud-based environments that pro-
vide the control, security and isolation that clients require for their 
most mission-critical workloads. IBM public clouds provide infra-
structure, platforms and applications as rapidly provisioned and 
highly-scalable cloud services on a pay-as-you-go basis. Hybrid 
clouds provide seamless integration across private and public cloud 
models, ensuring the interoperability, portability and scalability that 
clients need to realize the full value of cloud. 
Business Model
The company’s business model is built to support two principal 
goals: helping clients to become more innovative, efficient and com-
petitive through the application of business insight and IT solutions; 
and providing long-term value to shareholders. The business model 
has been developed over time through strategic investments in 
capabilities and technologies that have superior long-term growth 
and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients. 
	
The company’s global capabilities include services, software, 
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad 
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide inte-
grated solutions to the company’s clients. 


===== PAGE 24 =====
23
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
The business model is resilient, adapting to the continuously 
changing market and economic environment. The company con-
tinues to divest certain businesses and strengthen its position 
through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-
value segments like business analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud 
computing. In addition, the company has transformed itself into a 
globally integrated enterprise which has improved overall productivity 
and is driving investment and expanding participation in the world’s 
fastest growing markets. 
	
This business model, supported by the company’s financial 
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash 
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.
Business Segments and Capabilities
The company’s major operations consists of five business seg-
ments: Global Tech­nology Services and Global Business Services, 
which the company collectively calls Global Services, Soft­ware, 
Systems and Technology and Global Finan­cing.
Global Services is a critical component of the company’s strategy 
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions to 
clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM software 
and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if a client solu-
tion requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global Services 
segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from outsourcing 
and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services backlog 
provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within Global 
Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech­nology 
Services and Global Business Services.
Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT infra­
structure and business process services, creating business value 
for clients through unique technology and IP integrated services within 
its global delivery model. By leveraging insights and experience drawn 
from IBM’s global scale, skills and technology, with applied innova-
tion from IBM Research, clients gain access to leading-edge, 
high-quality services with improved productivity, flexibility, cost 
and outcomes.
GTS Capabilities
Strategic Outsourcing Services: delivers comprehensive IT out-
sourcing services dedicated to transforming clients’ existing 
infrastructures to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk 
management and financial value. The company integrates long-
standing expertise in service management and technology with the 
ability to exploit the power of new technologies from IBM systems 
and software, such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization, 
to deliver high performance, innovation and improved ability to 
achieve business objectives.
Global Process Services: delivers a range of offerings consisting of 
standardized through transformational solutions including process-
ing platforms and business process outsourcing. These services 
deliver improved business results to clients through the strategic 
change and/or operation of the client’s business processes, applica-
tions and infrastructure.
Integrated Technology Services: delivers a portfolio of project-
based and managed services that enable clients to transform and 
optimize their IT environments by driving efficiency, flexibility and 
productivity, while reducing costs. The standardized portfolio is 
built around key assets and patented software, and incorporates 
best practices and proven methodologies that ensure predictive 
quality of delivery, security and compliance.
Technology Support Services: delivers a complete line of support 
services from product maintenance through solution support to 
maintain and improve the availability of clients’ IT infrastructures.
Global Business Services (GBS) has the mission to deliver pre-
dictable business outcomes to the company’s clients across two 
primary business areas: Consulting and Application Management 
Services. These professional services deliver business value and 
innovation to clients through solutions which leverage industry and 
business process expertise. The role of GBS is to drive initiatives 
that integrate IBM content and solutions and drive the progress of 
the company’s four primary growth initiatives.
	
As clients transform themselves in response to market trends 
like Big Data, social and mobile computing, GBS is aligning its exper-
tise and capabilities to address two interdependent categories of 
opportunity: Front Office Digitization, which describes the markets 
forming around new models of engagement with all audiences; and 
the Globally Integrated Enterprise, which describes the mandate to 
integrate data and processes in support of the new front-office pro-
grams, and build far more flexible information applications.
GBS Capabilities
Consulting: delivering client value with solutions in Strategy and 
Transformation; Application Innovation Services; Enterprise Applica-
tions and Smarter Analytics. Consulting is also focused on bringing 
to market client solutions that drive Front Office Digitization in 
Smarter Commerce, Cloud, Mobile and Social Business.
Application Management Services: application management, main-
tenance and support services for packaged software, as well as 
custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered through advanced 
capabilities in areas such as application testing and modernization, 
cloud application services, the company’s highly differentiated glob-
ally integrated capability model, industry knowledge and the 
standardization and automation of application management.
Software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems 
software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate systems, 
processes and applications across a standard software platform to 
improve their business results, solve critical problems and gain com-
petitive advantage within their industries. IBM middleware is 
designed on open standards, making it easier to integrate disparate 
business applications, developed by different methods and imple-
mented at different times. Operating systems are the software 
engines that run computers. Approximately two-thirds of external 
Software segment revenue is annuity based, coming from recurring 
license charges and ongoing post-contract support. The remaining 
one-third relates to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements in which 
clients pay one, up-front payment for a perpetual license. Typically, 
the sale of OTC software includes one year of post-contract sup-
port. Clients can also purchase ongoing post-contract support after 
the first year, which includes unspecified product upgrades and 
technical support.


===== PAGE 25 =====
24
24
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software Capabilities
WebSphere Software: delivers capabilities that enable organizations 
to run high-performance business applications. With these applica-
tions, clients can integrate and manage business processes across 
their organizations with the flexibility and agility they need to respond 
to changing conditions. Built on services-oriented architecture 
(SOA), and open standards support for cloud, mobile and social 
interactions, the WebSphere platform enables enterprises to extend 
their reach and optimize interactions with their key constituents. 
Smarter Commerce software helps companies better manage and 
improve each step of their value chain and capitalize on opportunities 
for profitable growth, efficiency and increased customer loyalty.
Information Management Software: enables clients to integrate, 
manage and analyze enormous amounts of data from a large variety 
of sources in order to gain competitive advantage and improve their 
business outcomes. With this approach, clients can extract real value 
out of their data and use it to make better business decisions. IBM’s 
middleware and integrated solutions include advanced database 
management, information integration, data governance, enterprise 
content management, data warehousing, business analytics and intel-
ligence, predictive analytics and big data analytics.
Tivoli Software: helps clients optimize the value they get from 
their infrastructures and technology assets through greater visibility, 
control and automation across their end-to-end business opera-
tions. These asset management solutions foster integrated service 
delivery for cloud and datacenter management, enterprise endpoint 
and mobile device management, asset and facilities management, 
and storage management. Tivoli includes security systems software 
that provides clients with a single security intelligence platform that 
enables them to better secure all aspects of their enterprise and 
prevent security breaches.
Lotus Software: enables businesses to connect people and pro-
cesses for more effective communication and increased productivity 
through collaboration, messaging and social networking software. By 
remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, IBM’s social business 
offerings help organizations reap real benefits associated with social 
networking, as well as create a more efficient and effective workforce.
Rational Software: supports software development for both IT, as 
well as complex and embedded system solutions, with a suite of 
Collaborative Lifecycle Management products. Jazz, Rational’s tech-
nology platform, transforms the way people work together to build 
software, making software delivery more integrated and collabora-
tive, while optimizing for successful business outcomes.
Operating Systems: software that manages the fundamental 
processes that make computers run.
Systems and Technology (STG) provides clients with business 
solutions requiring advanced computing power and storage capa-
bilities. Approximately half of Systems and Technology’s server and 
storage sales transactions are through the company’s business 
partners; with the balance direct to end-user clients. In addition, 
Systems and Technology provides leading semiconductor technology, 
products and pack­aging solutions for IBM’s own advanced technol-
ogy needs and for external clients.
Systems and Technology Capabilities
Systems: a range of general purpose and integrated systems 
designed and optimized for specific business, public and scientific 
computing needs. These systems—System z, Power Systems and 
System x—are typically the core technology in data centers that 
provide required infrastructure for business and institutions. Also, 
these systems form the foundation for IBM’s integrated offerings, 
such as IBM PureSystems, IBM Smart Analytics, IBM Netezza, 
IBM SmartCloud Entry and IBM BladeCenter for Cloud. IBM serv-
ers use both IBM and non-IBM microprocessor technology and 
operating systems. All IBM servers run Linux, a key open-source 
operating system. 
Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients to 
retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital infor-
mation. These solutions address critical client requirements for 
information retention and archiving, security, compliance and stor-
age optimization including data deduplication, availability and 
virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and 
tape storage systems and software.
Microelectronics: semiconductor design and manufacturing primarily 
for use in IBM systems and storage products as well as delivering 
semiconductors and related services to external clients.
Global Financing facilitates clients’ acquisition of IBM systems, 
software and services. Global Financing invests in financing assets, 
leverages with debt and manages the associated risks with the 
objective of generating consistently strong returns on equity. The 
primary focus on the company’s offerings and clients mitigates 
many of the risks normally associated with a financing company. 
Global Financing has the benefit of both a deep knowledge of its 
client base and a clear insight into the products and services that 
are being financed. This combination allows Global Financing to 
effectively manage two of the major risks (credit and residual value) 
that are normally associated with financing. 
Global Financing Capabilities
Client Financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal 
clients for terms generally between one and seven years. Internal 
financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ long-term 
client service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected 
portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily for cash 
management purposes. All internal financing arrangements are at 
arm’s-length rates and are based upon market conditions.
Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts receiv-
able financing to dealers and remarketers of IT products. 
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: as equipment is returned at 
the conclusion of a lease transaction, these assets are refurbished 
and sold or leased to new or existing clients both externally and 
internally. Exter­nally remarketed equipment revenue represents 
sales or leases to clients and resellers. Internally remarketed equip-
ment revenue primarily represents used equipment that is sold 
internally to Systems and Technology and Global Services. Systems 
and Technology may also sell the equipment that it purchases from 
Global Financing to external clients.


===== PAGE 26 =====
25
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Worldwide Organizations
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s delivery 
of value to its clients:
•	
Sales and Distribution
•	
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
•	
Enterprise Transformation
•	
Integrated Supply Chain
Sales and Distribution
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than 
170 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribu-
tion of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution organization 
manages a strong global footprint, with dedicated country-based 
operating units focused on delivering client value. Within these units, 
client relationship professionals work with integrated teams of con-
sultants, product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to improve 
clients’ business performance. These teams deliver value by under-
standing the clients’ businesses and needs, and then bring together 
capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network of Business 
Partners to develop and implement solutions.
	
By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s 
geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for 
local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and 
timely investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic 
units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas. 
IBM extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by lever-
aging industry skills with marketing, Inside Sales and local 
Business Partner resources.
	
Through its growth markets organization, the company continues 
to increase its focus on the emerging markets around the world 
that have market growth rates greater than the global average—
countries within Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East 
and Latin America. The company’s major markets include the G7 
countries of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States 
(U.S.) and the United Kingdom (UK) plus Austria, the Bahamas, 
Belgium, the Caribbean region, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Greece, 
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, 
Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.
	
The majority of IBM’s revenue, excluding the company’s original 
equipment manufacturer (OEM) technology business, occurs in 
industries that are broadly grouped into six sectors:
•	
Financial Services: Banking, Financial Markets, Insurance
•	
Public: Education, Government, Healthcare, Life Sciences
•	
Industrial: Aerospace and Defense, Automotive,  
Chemical and Petroleum, Electronics
•	
Distribution: Consumer Products, Retail,  
Travel and Trans­portation
•	
Communications: Telecommunications,  
Media and Entertain­ment, Energy and Utilities
•	
General Business: Cross-sector representation of intermediate-
sized large enterprises as well as mid-market clients (less than 
1,000 employees)
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
IBM’s R&D operations differentiate the company from its competitors. 
IBM annually invests over $6 billion for R&D, focusing on high-
growth, high-value opportunities.
	
IBM Research works with clients and the company’s business 
units through 12 global labs on near-term and mid-term innovations. 
It contributes many new technologies to IBM’s portfolio every year 
and helps clients address their most difficult challenges. IBM 
Research also explores the boundaries of science and technol-
ogy—from nanotechnology, to future systems, to big data analytics, 
to secure clouds, to IBM Watson, a “cognitive” learning system that 
applied advanced analytics to defeat the all-time champions on the 
television quiz show, Jeopardy!. The Watson system is being intro-
duced to the market for advanced healthcare applications and is 
being further developed and extended within healthcare and in 
other industries. 
	
IBM Research also focuses on differentiating IBM’s services 
businesses providing new capabilities and solutions. It has the 
world’s largest mathematics department of any public company, 
enabling IBM to create unique analytic solutions and actively engage 
with clients on their toughest challenges.
	
In 2012, IBM was awarded more U.S. patents than any other 
company for the 20th consecutive year. IBM’s 6,478 patents in 2012 
included inventions that will enable fundamental advancements in 
analytics, big data, cybersecurity, cloud, mobile, social networking 
and software defined environments, as well as industry solutions for 
retail, banking, healthcare and transportation. It was the most U.S. 
patents ever awarded to one company in a single year.
	
The company continues to actively seek intellectual property 
protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on other 
initiatives designed to leverage its intellectual property leadership. 
Some of IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively 
in IBM products, while others are licensed and may be used in 
either/both IBM products and/or the products of the licensee. 
While the company’s various proprietary intellectual property rights 
are important to its success, IBM believes its business as a whole 
is not materially dependent on any particular patent or license, 
or any particular group of patents or licenses. IBM owns or is 
licensed under a number of patents, which vary in duration, relating 
to its products.
Enterprise Transformation
A key element of the company’s strategy has been focused on 
becoming the premier globally integrated enterprise. The company 
has implemented a consistent set of processes and standards 
worldwide to reduce inefficiencies and improve collaboration. With 
its processes fully standardized, the company implemented a new 
operating model with work shared in global resource centers of 
excellence located where it made the most business sense. The 
company has shifted resources toward building client relationships 
and employee skills, while positioning the company for new market 
opportunities. During this transformation, IBM pioneered this new 
operating model, changing from a classic “multinational,” with smaller 
versions of the parent company replicated in countries around the 
world, to a global model with one set of processes, shared services 
and broadly distributed decision making. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
26
26
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Year in Review
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2012 versus 2011 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external 
revenue and gross margin results.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$  40,236
$  40,879 
(1.6)%
1.3%
Gross margin
36.6%
35.0%
1.6 pts.
Global Business Services
18,566
19,284
(3.7)%
(1.6)%
Gross margin
30.0%
28.8%
1.2 pts.
Software
25,448
24,944
2.0%
4.3%
Gross margin
88.7%
88.5%
0.2 pts.
Systems and Technology
17,667
18,985
(6.9)%
(5.9)%
Gross margin
39.1%
39.8%
(0.7) pts.
Global Financing
2,013
2,102
(4.2)%
(1.2)%
Gross margin
46.5%
49.8%
(3.3 ) pts.
Other
577
722
(20.1)%
(18.7)%
Gross margin
(71.6)%
(54.5)%
(17.1) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$104,507
$106,916 
(2.3)%
0.0%
Total consolidated gross profit
$  50,298
$  50,138
0.3%
Total consolidated gross margin
48.1%
46.9%
1.2 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
375
340
10.3%
Acquisition-related charges
1
1
13.1
Retirement-related costs/(income)
264
2
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$  50,938
$  50,481
0.9%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
48.7%
47.2%
1.5 pts.
NM—Not meaningful
	
The company has now embarked on the next generation of 
its transformation in which new capabilities and technologies like 
business analytics and cloud computing will drive performance. 
The proven principles of the globally integrated enterprise will 
be applied to all of the company’s spending to continue to drive 
additional productivity benefits in shared services, end-to-end 
process transformation and integrated operations. The company 
primarily reinvests the benefits of its enterprise transformation initia-
tives in remixing its spending profile and resources to the higher 
growth, higher margin initiatives such as business analytics, Smarter 
Planet and cloud computing, in addition to improving profitability.
Integrated Supply Chain
IBM spends approximately $35 billion annually through its supply 
chain, procuring materials and services globally. In addition, in 2012, 
the company managed approximately $20 billion in procurement 
spending for its clients through the Global Process Services orga-
nization. The supply, manufacturing, and logistics and customer 
fulfillment operations are integrated in one operating unit that has 
optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and streamlining internal 
processes has improved sales force productivity and operational 
effectiveness and efficiency. Continuous improvements to supply 
chain resiliency against marketplace changes and risks have been 
particularly valuable in maintaining continuity during natural disasters 
and other disruptive events. 
	
The company’s continuing efforts to derive business value from 
its own globally integrated supply chain provides a strategic advan-
tage for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages its 
supply chain expertise for clients through its supply chain business 
transformation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate 
clients’ end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement to 
logistics.
	
Increasingly the company is using analytics to measure, manage 
and fine tune its supply chain operations, which will help to reshape 
its operations and create value for clients. The goal is to continue to 
increase the use of analytics in the five major areas of supply chain: 
1) Supply Chain Visibility, 2) Risk Management, 3) Customer Insight, 
4) Cost Containment, and 5) Global Supply Chain and Sustainability.


===== PAGE 28 =====
27
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents each reportable segment’s external revenue as a percentage of total segment external revenue and each 
reportable segment’s pre-tax income as a percentage of total segment pre-tax income.
Revenue
Pre-tax Income*
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2012
2011
Global Technology Services
38.7%
38.5%
29.0%
27.4%
Global Business Services
17.9
18.2
12.4
13.1
Total Global Services
56.6
56.7
41.4
40.6
Software
24.5
23.5
45.0
43.5
Systems and Technology
17.0
17.9
5.1
7.1
Global Financing
1.9
2.0
8.5
8.8
Total
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
 * Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items; 
see note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 134 to 138 for additional information.
declined 4.0 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. 
The services segments also had strength in all the key growth initia-
tives, which are becoming a larger part of the services business as 
the company continues to shift toward higher value content. Total 
outsourcing revenue of $27,552 million decreased 2.6 percent (flat 
adjusted for currency) and total transactional revenue of $23,907 
million decreased 1.8 percent (flat adjusted for currency) year to year.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Global Services external revenue
$58,802
$60,163 
(2.3)%
0.4%
Global Technology Services
$40,236
$40,879 
(1.6)%
1.3%
Outsourcing
23,344
23,911
(2.4)
0.5
Integrated Technology Services
9,550
9,453
1.0
3.7
Maintenance
7,343
7,515
(2.3)
0.6
Global Business Services
$18,566
$19,284
(3.7)%
(1.6)%
Outsourcing
4,209
4,390
(4.1)
(1.7)
Consulting and Systems Integration
14,358
14,895
(3.6)
(1.6)
Global Services
In 2012, the Global Services segments, Global Technology Services 
(GTS) and Global Business Services (GBS), delivered revenue of 
$58,802 million, grew pre-tax profit 7 percent and expanded pre-tax 
margin 1.5 points on an as-reported basis. Revenue performance was 
led by strength in the growth markets which were up 4.8 percent (9 
percent adjusted for currency) and now represents over 20 percent 
of total Global Services revenue. Revenue from the major markets 


===== PAGE 29 =====
28
28
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Global Technology Services revenue of $40,236 million in 2012 
decreased 1.6 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted 
for currency year to year. Revenue growth from the backlog was 
partially offset by a decline in revenue from new signings and a 
decrease in sales in existing accounts. Revenue performance was 
led by the growth markets which were up 5.0 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency). GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 2.4 
percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency 
in 2012. Outsourcing revenue from the growth markets increased 
2.4 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency), as the outsourcing 
offerings help clients build out their IT infrastructures. Integrated 
Technology Services (ITS) revenue increased 1.0 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011, and continued 
to be led by strength in the growth markets which increased 10.3 
percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
Global Business Services revenue of $18,566 million decreased 
3.7 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012. On a geographic 
basis, solid performance in the growth markets, with revenue up 
4.3 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency), was offset by a 
5.1 percent decline (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the major 
markets. The growth initiatives—business analytics, Smarter Planet 
and cloud had solid double-digit revenue growth, and represented 
over one-third of total GBS revenue in 2012. As GBS shifts more of 
its business to higher value content, these larger, more complex 
engagements are having a positive effect on the GBS backlog. 
The GBS backlog grew for the fourth consecutive year at constant 
currency—although the backlog is mixing to longer duration engage-
ments. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased 4.1 percent 
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 year to year, and Consulting 
and Systems Integration (C&SI) revenue decreased 3.6 percent 
(2 percent adjusted for currency). Both GBS lines of business had 
solid revenue performance year to year in the growth markets with 
Application Outsourcing and C&SI up 1.5 percent and 5.3 percent, 
respectively, as reported, and up 6 percent and 8 percent, respec-
tively, at constant currency.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Global Services
Global Technology Services
External gross profit
$14,740
$14,320
2.9%
External gross profit margin
36.6%
35.0%
1.6 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  6,961
$  6,284
10.8%
Pre-tax margin
16.8%
14.9%
1.9 pts.
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$  5,564
$  5,545
0.3%
External gross profit margin
30.0%
28.8%
1.2 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  2,983
$  3,006
(0.8)%
Pre-tax margin
15.5%
15.0%
0.5 pts.
 ­
GTS gross profit increased 2.9 percent in 2012 and the gross profit 
margin improved 1.6 points year to year with margin expansion 
in each line of business, led by Outsourcing. Pre-tax income of 
$6,961 million in 2012 increased 10.8 percent year to year and the 
pre-tax margin expanded 1.9 points to 16.8 percent. Normalized for 
workforce rebalancing charges of $151 million and $5 million in the 
third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, GTS pre-tax income was 
up 13.1 percent and pre-tax margin expanded 2.2 points. The year-
over-year gross and pre-tax margin expansion was driven by several 
factors: the work done to improve the profitability of a number of low 
margin contracts in the outsourcing portfolio, increased contribution 
from the higher margin growth markets, and increased efficiency 
and productivity from the focus on automation and process primarily 
through the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives. 
	
The GBS gross profit margin expanded 1.2 points, led primarily 
by improved profit performance in Application Outsourcing. GBS 
pre-tax income of $2,983 million declined 0.8 percent in 2012 with 
a pre-tax margin of 15.5 percent, an improvement of 0.5 points year 
to year. Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of $113 million 
and $5 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, 
GBS pre-tax income was up 2.8 percent and the pre-tax margin 
expanded 1.1 points. The gross and pre-tax margins benefitted from 
improved service delivery and yield from the company’s enterprise 
productivity initiatives. 
	
The total Global Services business delivered strong profit and 
margin expansion throughout 2012. Pre-tax income of $9,944 million 
in 2012 increased 7.0 percent year to year. Normalized for the higher 
level of workforce rebalancing charges in 2012, pre-tax income was 
up 9.8 percent and the pre-tax margin expanded 1.9 points com-
pared to the prior year.
Global Services Backlog
The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2012 was 
$140 billion, a decrease of 0.3 percent as reported, but an increase 
of 1 percent adjusted for currency compared to the December 31, 
2011 balance, and an increase of 1.9 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) compared to the September 30, 2012 balance. Revenue 
generated from the backlog is approximately 70 percent of total 
services annual revenue in any year, with the remainder coming from 
transactional signings in the year, and sales and volumes into the 
existing client base. In 2013, the projected total services revenue 
from the backlog is expected to be up 1 percent year to year at 
consistent foreign currency exchange rates. This includes 2 percent 
growth from the run out of the opening backlog and a 1 percent 
impact from the work done to restructure a number of lower margin 
contracts in the outsourcing business. Despite the impact to revenue 
growth, these restructured contracts have improved the profitability 
of the backlog. These contracts provided year-to-year profit 
improvement in 2012. This impact, which will carryforward to 2013, 
will contribute modest profit growth in 2013 off this higher profit 
base, with the gross profit coming from the backlog more represen-
tative of a 2 percent backlog growth versus a 1 percent growth. 
	
The total estimated growth markets backlog at December 31, 
2012 increased 13.6 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency) year 
to year. The estimated transactional backlog at December 31, 2012 
increased 8.7 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and the 
estimated outsourcing backlog decreased 3.3 percent (2 percent 
adjusted for currency), respectively, from the December 31, 2011 levels.


===== PAGE 30 =====
29
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS 
Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Maintenance. 
Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS Outsourc-
ing. Transactional backlog includes ITS and Consulting and Systems 
Integration.Total backlog is intended to be a statement of overall work 
under contract and therefore does include Maintenance. Backlog 
estimates are subject to change and are affected by several factors, 
including terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic 
revalidations, adjustments for revenue not materialized and adjust-
ments for currency.
	
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the 
value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services contract. 
There are no third-party standards or requirements governing the 
calculation of signings. The calculation used by management involves 
Software revenue of $25,448 million increased 2.0 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. Software revenue 
growth continued to be led by the key branded middleware products 
with constant currency growth in all the brands, and particular 
strength and share gains in WebSphere and Tivoli. Software contin-
ued its momentum throughout 2012 in the growth initiatives with 
strong performance in business analytics, Smarter Commerce and 
cloud. The Software business delivered $10.8 billion in segment 
estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s commit-
ment, including the type and duration of the agreement, and the 
presence of termination charges or wind-down costs. 
	
Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and 
Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract extensions 
and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of 
the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included in signings 
as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where 
revenues equal renewals.
	
Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as 
positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the 
company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be 
recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or coin-
cidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total signings
$56,595
$57,435
(1.5)%
1.1%
Outsourcing signings
$27,891
$29,251
(4.6)%
(1.9)%
Transactional signings
28,703
28,184
1.8
4.1
Software
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Software external revenue
$25,448
$24,944 
2.0%
4.3%
Middleware
$20,983
$20,650 
1.6%
3.9%
Key Branded Middleware
16,528
16,055
2.9
5.2
WebSphere Family
7.8
9.9
Information Management
1.5
3.8
Lotus
(2.1)
0.3
Tivoli
4.1
6.2
Rational
(1.6)
0.6
Other middleware
4,455
4,596
(3.1)
(0.6)
Operating systems
2,525
2,480
1.8
4.3
Other
1,940
1,813
7.0
9.2
* Reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation.
($ in billions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for
Currency
Backlog
Total backlog
$140.3
$140.6
(0.3)%
 0.6%
Outsourcing backlog
89.4
92.5
(3.3)
(2.4)


===== PAGE 31 =====
30
30
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
pre-tax profit, an increase of $840 million from 2011. The results 
reflect the company’s sustained investment in strategic branded 
software. In addition to organic investments, acquisitions have pro-
vided additional capabilities, while leveraging the existing portfolio 
of offerings. The software business completed nine acquisitions in 
2012, further increasing the company’s capabilities in analytics, 
cloud and Smarter Planet.
	
Key branded middleware revenue increased 2.9 percent (5 percent 
adjusted for currency) and again gained market share in 2012, as the 
Software business continued to be the leader in the middleware 
market. Revenue continued to mix to the faster growing and higher 
value branded middleware products which accounted for 65 percent 
of total software revenue in 2012, an increase of 1 point from 2011. 
	
WebSphere revenue increased 7.8 percent (10 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2012, with strong performance throughout the year, 
and gained share. Revenue performance included strong growth in 
the core offerings of commerce and application servers. Commerce 
revenue increased 14 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency) and 
application server products increased 6 percent (8 percent adjusted 
for currency). The company further strengthened its WebSphere 
portfolio during the year with the acquisitions of Worklight, DemandTec, 
Emptoris and Tealeaf. 
	
Information Management revenue increased 1.5 percent (4 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. Performance 
was led by growth in the business analytics offerings. The acquisi-
tions of Varicent and Vivisimo expanded the Business Analytics and 
Optimization software capabilities. Varicent’s analytics software 
helps clients optimize sales performance management. Vivisimo 
expands the breadth of the company’s big data capabilities and 
creates the most complete end-to-end big data solution for clients. 
	
Tivoli revenue increased 4.1 percent (6 percent adjusted for cur-
rency) in 2012, led by its storage and security offerings, and gained 
share. Tivoli storage revenue was up 12 percent (14 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2012, with double-digit constant currency growth in 
each quarter, reflecting the value of storage software. Tivoli security 
revenue increased 8 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency), with 
strong contribution from Q1 Labs which provides next generation 
security intelligence. 
	
Lotus revenue decreased 2.1 percent as reported, but was flat 
year to year at constant currency in 2012. The social business offer-
ings performed well, including contribution from the acquisition of 
Kenexa, a leading provider of recruiting and talent management 
solutions. 
	
Rational revenue decreased 1.6 percent as reported, but increased 
1 percent at constant currency in 2012 year over year, and held share. 
	
Operating systems revenue increased 1.8 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011, driven by Platform 
Computing which provides cluster and grid management software 
for distributed computing environments. 
	
Other software revenue increased 7.0 percent (9 percent adjusted 
for currency) driven by growth in software-related services.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Software
External gross profit
$22,569
$22,065
2.3%
External gross profit margin
88.7%
88.5%
0.2 pts.
Pre-tax income
$10,810
$  9,970
8.4%
Pre-tax margin
37.6%
35.3%
2.3 pts.
Software gross profit increased 2.3 percent to $22,569 million in 
2012, with a gross profit margin of 88.7 percent, up 0.2 points year 
to year. Software pre-tax income of $10,810 million increased 8.4 
percent and the pre-tax margin improved 2.3 points to 37.6 percent. 
Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of $94 million and 
$6 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, software 
pre-tax income was up 9.3 percent and the pre-tax margin 
expanded 2.6 points. The Software business had another success-
ful year leveraging revenue growth and expense productivity to drive 
significant margin expansion and profit growth.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue
$17,667
$18,985
(6.9)%
(5.9)%
System z
5.4%
6.3%
Power Systems
(8.5)
(7.4)
System x
(3.7)
(2.7)
Storage
(5.8)
(4.1)
Total Systems excluding Retail Store Solutions
(3.7)
(2.5)
Microelectronics OEM
(14.4)
(14.4)
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions
(5.1)
(4.0)
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012)
(52.6)
(51.7)
* Reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation.


===== PAGE 32 =====
31
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 6.9 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Adjusting for the divested 
RSS business, revenue declined 5.1 percent (4 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2012. Growth markets revenue increased 0.3 percent 
(1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, compared to the prior year 
while major markets revenue decreased 8.3 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency). During 2012, the company’s continued invest-
ments for innovation supported the introduction of the new System 
z mainframe, the PureSystems offerings and new Storage and 
POWER7+ products. In its introductory year, the company sold more 
than 2,300 PureSystems in over 70 countries.
	
System z revenue increased 5.4 percent (6 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2012 versus 2011. The increase was driven by the new 
mainframe which began shipping late in the third quarter. Fourth 
quarter revenue increased 55.6 percent (56 percent adjusted for 
currency), as revenue increased in the major markets over 50 per-
cent and over 65 percent in the growth markets. MIPS (millions of 
instructions per second) shipments increased 19 percent in 2012 
versus the prior year. The increase in MIPS was driven by the new 
mainframe shipments, including specialty engines, which increased 
44 percent year over year driven by Linux workloads. This is a good 
indicator of new workloads moving to this platform. The performance 
reflects the technology leadership and value of the vertically integrated 
stack that the company’s flagship server is delivering to its clients.
	
Power Systems revenue decreased 8.5 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Low-end servers increased 
6 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) offset by declines in 
high-end and midrange products. Early in October, the company 
announced new POWER7+ based servers. The high-end and mid-
range models available in the fourth quarter performed well in the 
period. The company will continue to refresh the Power portfolio in 
the first half of 2013. In 2012, the company had nearly 1,200 competi-
tive displacements resulting in over $1 billion of business; almost 
equally from Hewlett Packard and Oracle/Sun. 
	
System x revenue decreased 3.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2012 versus 2011. High-end System x revenue increased 
5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus the prior 
year, while high-volume and blade servers declined year to year. 
	
Storage revenue decreased 5.8 percent (4 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Total disk revenue decreased 3 per-
cent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Tape 
revenue decreased 16 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) in 
2012 versus the prior year. The value in storage solutions continues 
to shift to software, as demonstrated by the ongoing success the 
company is having in its Tivoli storage software offerings. 
	
Retail Stores Solutions revenue decreased 52.6 percent (52 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. In the third quarter, 
the company divested the Retail Stores Solutions business to Toshiba 
Tec. See the caption, “Divestitures,” on page 91 for additional infor-
mation regarding the transaction. 
	
Microelectronics OEM revenue decreased 14.4 percent (14 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Systems and Technology
External gross profit
$6,903
$7,555 
(8.6)%
External gross profit margin
39.1%
39.8%
(0.7) pts.
Pre-tax income
$1,227
$1,633 
(24.9)%
Pre-tax margin
6.7%
8.2%
(1.5) pts.
The decrease in external gross profit in 2012 versus 2011 was due 
to lower revenue and a lower overall gross profit margin. 
	
Overall gross margin decreased 0.7 points in 2012 versus the 
prior year. The decrease was driven by lower margins in System x 
(0.6 points), Microelectronics (0.6 points), Storage (0.5 points) and 
Power Systems (0.2 points), partially offset by improvement due to 
revenue mix (1.2 points).
	
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased $406 
million (24.9 percent) to $1,227 million in 2012, with a pre-tax margin 
of 6.7 percent. Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of 
$46 million and $3 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011, 
respectively, pre-tax income decreased 22.2 percent and the pre-
tax margin decreased by 1.3 points.
Global Financing
See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s 
segment results.


===== PAGE 33 =====
32
32
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis. 
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total revenue
$104,507
$106,916 
(2.3)%
0.0%
Geographies
$102,268
$104,170 
(1.8)%
0.5%
Americas
44,556
44,944
(0.9)
0.0
Europe/Middle East/Africa
31,775
33,952
(6.4)
(1.0)
Asia Pacific
25,937
25,273
2.6
3.3
Major markets
(3.5)%
(1.3)%
Growth markets
4.2%
6.9%
BRIC countries
7.4%
12.2%
Total geographic revenue decreased 1.8 percent (flat adjusted for 
currency) in 2012; excluding the divested RSS business, revenue 
decreased 1.4 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent at 
constant currency compared to the prior year. Revenue perfor-
mance at constant currency was driven by strong results in the 
growth markets, offsetting a modest decline year to year in the 
major markets. 
	
Across all geographies, growth markets revenue increased 4.2 
percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and these countries now 
represent 24 percent of total geographic revenue, an increase of 8 
points since 2006 when the company introduced its 2010 road map. 
Adjusted for currency, revenue growth in these fast growing markets 
outpaced the major markets in 2012 by approximately 8 points. The 
BRIC countries of Brazil, Russia, India and China combined revenue 
increased 7.4 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, with 
double-digit growth in Russia, India and China, adjusted for currency. 
Overall in 2012, the company had double-digit constant currency 
revenue growth in nearly 35 growth market countries. The company 
is continuing to expand into new countries and territories, to build 
out IT infrastructures in support of economic growth and to take a 
leadership position in key industries. To drive market expansion, in 
2012 the company accelerated the opening of new branch offices 
resulting in a doubling of the number of face-to-face branches when 
compared to 2011. The company now has almost 450 face-to-face 
and virtual branch offices in the growth markets.
	
Americas revenue decreased 0.9 percent (flat adjusted for 
currency) in 2012. Within the major market countries, the U.S. 
decreased 1.1 percent and Canada decreased 1.5 percent as 
reported (flat adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin America 
growth markets increased 1.4 percent (8 percent adjusted for 
currency) with constant currency growth in Brazil of 6 percent, 
down 4.6 percent as reported. 
	
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue decreased 6.4 per-
cent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. 
Within the major market countries, the UK was essentially flat (up 1 
percent adjusted for currency), Germany was down 7.6 percent (flat 
adjusted for currency), France was down 12.6 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency) and Italy was down 8.4 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency). The EMEA growth markets increased 0.8 
percent (5 percent at constant currency) led by growth in Russia of 
11.7 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
Asia Pacific revenue increased 2.6 percent (3 percent adjusted 
for currency) year over year. The Asia Pacific growth markets 
increased 6.0 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency), with growth 
led by China (17.9 percent as reported, 16 percent at constant 
currency) and India (decreased 0.9 percent as reported, increased 
13 percent at constant currency). Japan revenue decreased 1.9 
percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) but improved sequentially 
throughout the year at constant currency and returned to growth 
in the fourth quarter of 2012. 
	
OEM revenue of $2,239 million in 2012 decreased 18.5 percent 
(18 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2011, driven by the 
Microelectronics OEM business.
Total Expense and Other Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$28,396
$29,135 
(2.5)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(328)
(289)
13.3
Acquisition-related charges
(35)
(45)
(21.2)
Non-operating retirement-related  
(costs)/income
(274)
74
NM
Total operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$27,760
$28,875
(3.9)%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
27.2%
27.3%
(0.1) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
26.6%
27.0%
(0.4) pts.
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 34 =====
33
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) decreased 2.5 percent in 2012 
versus 2011. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) 
decreased 3.9 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers of the 
year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) were 
approximately:
	
	
Total 	
Operating 
	
	
Consolidated 	
 (non-GAAP)
•	
Currency* 	
(5) points	
(5) points
•	
Acquisitions**	
3  points	
2  points
•	
Base expense	
(0) points	
(2) points
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
In the execution of its strategy, the company continues to invest 
in its growth initiatives, innovation and strategic acquisitions. The 
company also has had an ongoing focus on increasing efficiency 
and productivity across the business. 
	
For additional information regarding total expense and other 
income, see the following analyses by category.
Selling, General and Administrative
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and  
administrative  expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$19,589
$20,287 
(3.4)%
Advertising and promotional expense
1,339
1,373
(2.5)
Workforce rebalancing charges
803
440
82.5
Retirement-related costs
945
603
56.7
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
328
289
13.3
Stock-based compensation
498
514
(3.0)
Bad debt expense
50
88
(42.5)
Total consolidated selling, general  
and administrative expense
$23,553
$23,594
(0.2)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(328)
(289)
13.3
Acquisition-related charges
(22)
(20)
10.2
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(294)
(13)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP)  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$22,910
$23,272
(1.6)%
NM—Not meaningful
Total Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense decreased 
0.2 percent in 2012 versus 2011. The decrease was primarily driven 
by the effects of currency (3 points), partially offset by acquisition-
related spending (2 points), while base spending was essentially flat. 
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 1.6 percent pri-
marily driven by the effects of currency (3 points) and lower base 
spending (1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spending 
(2 points). The increase in workforce rebalancing charges was due 
to actions primarily focused on the company’s non-U.S. operations 
in the third quarter of 2012. The increase in retirement-related costs 
was primarily driven by the charge related to a court decision 
regarding one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a result of the 
ruling, the company recorded an additional retirement-related obli-
gation of $162 million in the third quarter of 2012. This charge is not 
reflected in operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense. See note M, 
“Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 110 through 112 for 
additional information. Bad debt expense decreased $37 million in 
2012 versus 2011, as the company increased its provisions in 2011 
reflecting the European credit environment. The accounts receivable 
provision coverage is 1.4 percent at December 31, 2012, a decrease 
of 10 basis points from year-end 2011.
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction  
losses/(gains)
$(240)
$ 513
NM%
(Gains)/losses on derivative 
instruments
72
(113)
NM
Interest income
(109)
(136)
(20.2)
Net (gains)/losses from securities  
and investment assets
(55)
(227)
(75.5)
Other
(511)
(58)
NM
Total consolidated other  
(income) and expense
$(843)
$  (20)
NM%
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related charges
(13)
(25)
(46.0)
Operating (non-GAAP)  
other (income) and expense
$(857)
$  (45)
NM%
NM—Not meaningful
Other (income) and expense was income of $843 million and $20 
million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. The increase in income of 
$823 million in 2012 was primarily driven by higher gains from foreign 
currency transactions ($753 million) due to rate volatility year to year, 
and the gain associated with the divested RSS business ($446 
million) reflected in Other in the table above. These increases in 
income were partially offset by increased losses on derivative instru-
ments ($184 million) and lower gains from securities and investment 
asset sales ($171 million). In 2011, the company had investment gains 
of over $200 million, primarily from the sale of Lenovo shares.


===== PAGE 35 =====
34
34
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated research, 
development and engineering
$6,302
$6,258
0.7%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related  
(costs)/income
20
88
(76.9)
Operating (non-GAAP) research, 
development and engineering
$6,322
$6,345
(0.4)%
The company continues to invest in research and development, 
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities 
and extending its technology leadership. Total research, development 
and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 0.7 percent in 2012 
versus 2011, primarily driven by acquisitions (3 points), partially offset 
by the effects of currency (2 points) and lower base spending (1 
point). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 0.4 percent 
in 2012 compared to the prior year primarily driven by the effects of 
currency (2 points) and lower base spending (2 points), partially 
offset by acquisitions (3 points). RD&E investments represented 
6.0 percent of revenue in 2012, compared to 5.9 percent in 2011.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Sales and other transfers  
of intellectual property
$   324
$   309
4.7%
Licensing/royalty-based fees
251
211
19.0
Custom development income
500
588
(14.9)
Total
$1,074
$1,108
(3.0)%
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may vary 
significantly from period to period depending upon timing of dives-
titures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and the timing 
of new patents and know-how development. There were no signifi-
cant individual IP transactions in 2012 or 2011.
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense
Total
$459
$411
11.8%
The increase in interest expense in 2012 versus 2011 was primarily 
driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower average 
interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in 
the Consolidated State­ment of Earnings only if the related external 
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business. 
See pages 66 and 67 for additional information regarding Global 
Financing debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense 
(excluding capitalized interest) for 2012 was $1,004 million, an increase 
of $40 million year to year.
Stock-Based Compensation
Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $688 million 
decreased $9 million compared to 2011. The decrease was primarily 
related to the company’s performance share units ($30 million), par-
tially offset by increases related to restricted stock units ($16 million) 
and the assumption of stock-based awards previously issued by 
acquired entities ($5 million). Cost, and the year-to-year change, was 
reflected in the following categories: Cost: $132 million, up $11 
million; SG&A expense: $498 million, down $16 million; and RD&E 
expense: $59 million, down $4 million.
	
See note R, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 117 to 120 
for additional information on stock-based incentive awards.
Retirement-Related Plans 
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement-
related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) 
relating to the job function of the plan participants.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Retirement-related plans—cost
Service cost
$    493
$    549
(10.2)%
Amortization of prior  
service cost/(credits)
(148)
(157)
(5.5)
Cost of defined contribution plans
1,506
1,513
(0.4)
Total operating costs
$ 1,851
$ 1,905
(2.8)%
Interest cost
4,238
4,601
(7.9)
Expected return on plan assets
(6,356)
(6,574)
(3.3)
Recognized actuarial losses
2,407
1,788
34.6
Plan amendments/curtailments/ 
settlements
1
1
14.4
Multi-employer plan/other costs
247
112
121.3
Total non-operating costs/
(income)
$    538
$     (72)
NM%
Total retirement-related  
plans—cost
$ 2,389
$ 1,832
30.3%
NM—Not meaningful
In 2012, total retirement-related plans cost increased by $556 million 
compared to 2011, primarily driven by an increase in recognized 
actuarial losses of $619 million, lower expected return on plan assets 
($219 million) and the charge related to the UK pension litigation 
($162 million). These increases were partially offset by lower interest 
cost of $363 million and lower service cost of $56 million. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
35
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section 
on page 18, the company characterizes certain retirement-related 
costs as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing this 
characterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2012 were 
$1,851 million, a decrease of $54 million compared to 2011, primarily 
driven by the $56 million decrease in service cost. Non-operating 
costs of $538 million increased $610 million in 2012, compared 
to the prior year, driven primarily by the increase in recognized actu-
arial losses ($619 million), lower expected return on plan assets 
($219 million) and the charge related to the UK pension litigation 
($162 million), partially offset by lower interest cost ($363 million). 
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2012 was 24.2 percent compared with
24.5 percent in 2011. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2012
was 24.0 percent compared with 24.5 percent in 2011. The 0.3 point
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax earnings (2.6 points) 
and the one-time benefit in the first quarter associated with a tax 
restructuring in Latin America (0.8 points), primarily offset by a 
decrease in the utilization of foreign tax credits in 2012 (2.9 points) 
and the unfavorable tax impact of the gain on the RSS divestiture 
(0.3 points).The remaining items were individually insignificant.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted-
average number of shares of common stock outstanding during 
the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis of 
the weighted-average number of shares of common stock out-
standing plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares 
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. 
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock options 
and stock awards.
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$14.37
$13.06
10.0%
Basic
$14.53
$13.25
9.7%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) 
$15.25
$13.44
13.5%
Weighted-average shares  
outstanding (in millions)
Assuming dilution
1,155.4
1,213.8
(4.8)%
Basic
1,142.5
1,197.0
(4.5)%
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2012 and 2011 were 
1,117.4 million and 1,163.2 million, respectively. The average number 
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 58.3 million 
shares lower in 2012 versus 2011. The decrease was primarily the 
result of the common stock repurchase program. See note L, 
“Equity Activity,” on page 107 for additional information regarding 
common stock activities. Also see note P, “Earnings Per Share of 
Common Stock,” on page 116.
Financial Position
Dynamics
At December 31, 2012, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity 
positions remained strong and well-positioned to support the com-
pany’s long-term objectives. Cash and marketable securities at 
year end were $11,128 million, a decrease of $794 million from the 
prior year-end position. During the year the company continued to 
manage the investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation 
and liquidity objectives. At December 31, 2012, there were no hold-
ings of European sovereign debt securities in the investment 
portfolio. 
	
Total debt of $33,269 million increased $1,949 million from the 
prior year-end level. The commercial paper balance at December 
31, 2012 was $1,800 million, a decrease of $500 million from the 
prior year. Within total debt, $24,501 million is in support of the 
Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.0 to 1 ratio. 
The company continues to have substantial flexibility in the market. 
During 2012, the company completed bond issuances totaling 
$7,875 million, with terms ranging from three to 30 years and priced 
from 0.55 to 4.00 percent depending on the maturity. The com-
pany has consistently generated strong cash flow from operations 
and continues to have access to additional sources of liquidity 
through the capital markets and its $10 billion global credit facility, 
with 100 percent of the facility available on a same-day basis.
	
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasures 
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at 
December 31. At December 31, 2012, the overall net underfunded 
position was $20,190 million, an increase of $3,800 million from 
December 31, 2011, as the increase in the benefit obligation due to 
the reduction in discount rates more than offset the returns on plan 
assets. At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans 
were well funded and the cash requirements related to these plans 
remain stable going forward at approximately $1 billion per year 
through 2015. In 2012, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan 
assets was 11.3 percent and the plan was 98 percent funded. Over-
all, global asset returns were 11.1 percent and the company’s 
qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 94 percent funded.
	
The company’s qualified defined benefit plans do hold European 
sovereign debt securities in their trust funds. See note S, “Retire-
ment-Related Benefits,” on page 128 for additional information.
	
During 2012, the company generated $19,586 million in cash 
from operations, a decrease of $260 million compared to 2011. In 
addition, the company generated $18,185 million in free cash flow 
in 2012, an increase of $1,581 million over the prior year. See pages 
56 and 57 for additional information on free cash flow. The com-
pany returned $15,768 million to shareholders in 2012, with $11,995 
million in gross share repurchases and $3,773 million in dividends. 
In 2012, the company repurchased approximately 61 million shares 
and had $8.7 billion remaining in share repurchase authorization 
at year end. The company’s strong cash generation permits the 
company to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most 
attractive long-term opportunities.


===== PAGE 37 =====
36
36
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing busi-
ness are a significant part of the company’s financial position. The 
financial position amounts appearing on page 72 are the consoli-
dated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts appearing 
in the separate Global Financing section, beginning on page 63, are 
supplementary data presented to facilitate an understanding of the 
Global Financing business.
Working Capital
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Current assets
$49,433
$50,928
Current liabilities
43,625
42,123
Working capital
$  5,807
$  8,805
Current ratio
1.13:1
1.21:1
Working capital decreased $2,998 million from the year-end 2011 
position. The key changes are described below:
	
Current assets decreased $1,496 million ($1,212 million adjusted 
for currency) due to:
•	
A decrease of $1,224 million in prepaid expenses and other 
current assets due to:
	
– A decrease of $610 million related to derivatives;  
$398 million in cash collateral received, and $213 million 
primarily related to currency rate volatility; and
	
– A decrease of $614 million in various prepaid expenses 
(taxes, maintenance, insurance, deposits)
•	
A decline of $794 million ($661 million adjusted for currency)  
in cash and cash equivalents, and marketable securities  
(see cash flow analysis in the following column); and
•	
A decrease of $308 million in inventory, primarily in Systems 
and Technology; partially offset by
•	
An increase of $1,016 million ($1,047 million adjusted for  
currency) in short-term receivables primarily attributable  
to higher volumes of financing receivables driven by  
customer loans and inventory financing.
Current liabilities increased $1,502 million ($1,682 million adjusted 
for currency) as a result of:
•	
An increase of $1,635 million in taxes primarily due to the 
reclassification of long-term tax liabilities to short term; and
•	
An increase of $719 million ($879 million adjusted for currency) 
in short-term debt due to:
	
– Reclassifications of $5,638 million from long-term debt 
and short-term additions of $4,541 million, offset by
	
– Maturities of approximately $8,792 million, and a decline  
of approximately $500 million in commercial paper; partially 
offset by
•	
A decrease of $565 million in accounts payable primarily 
related to the obligation to return cash collateral received 
related to derivative valuations.
Cash Flow
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financing 
activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
on page 73, is summarized in the table below. These amounts include 
the cash flows associated with the Global Financing business.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Net cash provided by/(used in)
Operating activities
$ 19,586
$ 19,846
Investing activities
(9,004)
(4,396)
Financing activities
(11,976)
(13,696)
Effect of exchange rate changes  
on cash and cash equivalents
(116)
(493)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
$  (1,511)
$   1,262
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $260 million 
in 2012 as compared to 2011 driven by the following key factors:
•	
A decrease in cash due to receivables of $1,290 million  
(normalized for a $339 million tax refund received in 2012),  
as a result of higher volumes in 2012; 
•	
A decrease in vendor payables of $675 million; 
•	
An increase in cash used for workforce rebalancing payments 
of $236 million, primarily in the non-U.S.; and 
•	
An increase in cash used for retirement-related plans  
of $181 million driven by an increase in nonpension post­
retirement contributions, partially offset by 
•	
Lower net tax payments of $999 million compared 
to 2011;
•	
Improved net income of $749 million; and 
•	
Lower cash requirements for inventory of $442 million.
Net cash used in investing activities increased $4,608 million primarily 
driven by:
•	
A net increase of $1,325 million in net cash used for  
acquisitions/divestitures; and 
•	
A decrease in cash of $2,719 million from net purchases  
of marketable securities and other investments.
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $1,719 million 
primarily as a result of:
•	
A decrease of $2,137 million of net cash used for common 
stock transactions; partially offset by 
•	
An increase of $300 million in cash dividends paid. 


===== PAGE 38 =====
37
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Noncurrent assets
$69,780
$65,505
Long-term debt
$24,088
$22,857
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt)
$32,516
$31,217
The increase in noncurrent assets of $4,276 million ($4,454 million 
adjusted for currency) was driven by:
•	
An increase of $3,429 million ($3,236 million adjusted  
for currency) in goodwill and intangible assets driven by  
acquisitions;
•	
An increase of $470 million in deferred taxes ($580 million 
adjusted for currency) driven by retirement-related  
activity; and 
•	
An increase of $2,036 million in financing receivables  
($2,214 million adjusted for currency) driven by increased  
volumes, partially offset by 
•	
A decrease of $1,899 million in prepaid pension assets  
($1,922 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by plan  
remeasurements.
Long-term debt increased by $1,231 million primarily driven by new 
debt issuances of $7,700 million, partially offset by reclasses to 
short-term debt of $5,638 million, and debt repurchased as a result 
of the debt exchange of $665 million.
	
Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, increased $1,299 
million ($1,558 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
•	
An increase in retirement and nonpension benefit obligations 
of $2,044 million ($2,264 million adjusted for currency)  
as a result of pension remeasurements; and 
•	
An increase in deferred income of $644 million driven by  
services and software arrangements; partially offset by 
•	
A decrease of $1,389 million in other liabilities driven  
by a reclass of tax-related liabilities to short term.
Debt
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored and 
strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liability 
profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility to 
access global funding sources as needed. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Total company debt
$33,269
$31,320
Total Global Financing segment debt
$24,501
$23,332
Debt to support external clients
21,583
20,051
Debt to support internal clients
2,919
3,281
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by 
other IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services, gener-
ate long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing 
asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global Services 
assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global Financing asset 
base. The debt analysis in the previous column is further detailed in 
the Global Financing section on pages 66 and 67.
	
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt-to-
capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and equity 
as management believes this is more representative of the com-
pany’s core business operations. This ratio can vary from period to 
period as the company manages its global cash and debt positions.
	
“Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financing 
debt and equity) was 36.1 percent at December 31, 2012 compared 
to 32.0 percent at December 31, 2011. The increase was primarily 
driven by an increase in non-Global Financing debt of $780 million 
and a decrease in non-Global Financing equity of $1,497 million from 
the December 31, 2011 balances.
	
Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2012 
was 63.7 percent versus 60.7 percent at December 31, 2011.
	
The increase in both the “core” debt-to-capitalization ratio and 
the consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio was impacted by the 
$5.2 billion impact to equity as a result of retirement-related plan 
remeasurements in December.
Debt Exchange
In the second quarter of 2012, the company completed an exchange 
of approximately $6 million of principal of its 7.125 percent deben-
tures due in 2096, $104 million principal of its 8.00 percent notes 
due in 2038 and $800 million of principal of its 5.60 percent senior 
notes due in 2039 for approximately $1,107 million of 4.00 percent 
senior notes due in 2042 and cash of approximately $121 million. 
The exchange was completed to retire high coupon debt in the 
current favorable interest rate environment. 
	
The debt exchange was accounted for as a non-revolving debt 
modification in accordance with accounting guidance, and therefore 
it did not result in any gain or loss recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. Cash payments will be amortized over the 
life of the new debt. Administrative fees with third parties in relation 
to the exchange were expensed as incurred.
Equity
Total equity decreased by $1,252 million as a result of an increase in 
treasury stock of $12,168 million; pension adjustments of $3,669 
million reflecting the impact of retirement-related plan remeasure-
ments; partially offset by an increase in retained earnings of $12,783 
million, and an increase of $1,980 million in common stock primarily 
driven by stock option exercises and stock based compensation.


===== PAGE 39 =====
38
38
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled 
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale 
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2012:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$50,298
$ 376
$ 264
$50,938
Gross profit margin
48.1%
0.4 pts.
0.3 pts.
48.7%
SG&A
$23,553
$(349)
$(294)
$22,910
RD&E
6,302
0
20
6,322
Other (income) and expense
(843)
(13)
0
(857)
Total expense and other (income)
28,396
(363)
(274)
27,760
Pre-tax income 
21,902
739
538
23,179
Pre-tax income margin
21.0%
0.7  pts.
0.5 pts.
22.2%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,298
$   98
$ 156
$  5,552
Effective tax rate
24.2%
(0.4)  pts.
0.1 pts.
24.0%
Net income
$16,604
$ 641
$ 381
$17,627
Net income margin
15.9%
0.6 pts.
0.4 pts.
16.9%
Diluted earnings per share
$  14.37
$0.55
$0.33
$  15.25
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective 
tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2011:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$50,138 
$ 341 
$      2
$50,481 
Gross profit margin
46.9%
0.3 pts.
0.0 pts.
47.2%
SG&A
$23,594 
$(309)
$   (13 )
$23,272 
RD&E
6,258
0
88
6,345
Other (income) and expense
(20)
(25)
0
(45)
Total expense and other (income)
29,135
(334)
74
28,875
Pre-tax income 
21,003
675
(72)
21,605
Pre-tax income margin
19.6%
0.6 pts.
(0.1) pts.
20.2%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,148
$ 179 
$   (40)
$  5,287 
Effective tax rate
24.5%
0.1 pts.
(0.1) pts.
24.5%
Net income
$15,855 
$ 495 
$   (32)
$16,318 
Net income margin
14.8%
0.5 pts.
(0.0) pts.
15.3%
Diluted earnings per share
$  13.06
$0.41 
$(0.03)
$  13.44 
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective 
tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 40 =====
39
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$29,304
$29,486 
(0.6)%*
Gross profit margin
51.8%
49.9%
1.8 pts.
Total expense and other income
$  7,336
$  7,448
(1.5)%
Total expense and other  
income-to-revenue ratio
25.0%
25.3%
(0.2 ) pts.
Income before income taxes
$  7,831
  $  7,274
7.7%
Provision for income taxes
  1,998
1,784
12.0%
Net income
$  5,833
$  5,490
6.3%
Net income margin
19.9%
18.6%
1.3 pts.
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    5.13
$     4.62
11.0%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,136.4
1,188.7
(4.4)%
* 0.3 percent adjusted for currency.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2012 and 2011.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$5,833
$5,490 
6.3%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
243
119
103.4
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
53
(12)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$6,129
$ 5,597
9.5%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)  
earnings per share
$  5.39
$  4.71 
14.4%
* See page 43 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
NM—Not meaningful
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2012, the company improved its year-to-year 
revenue growth rate, primarily in higher margin areas, while driving 
significant margin expansion and profit growth. The company deliv-
ered diluted earning per share of $5.13, a growth of 11.0 percent, and 
$5.39, an increase of 14.4 percent on an operating (non-GAAP) 
basis. The company generated $6.3 billion in cash from operations 
in the fourth quarter driving shareholder returns of $4.0 billion in 
gross common stock repurchases and dividends.
	
Revenue in the fourth quarter declined 0.6 percent as reported, 
but was flat at constant currency. Normalized for the RSS divestiture, 
revenue increased 1 point at constant currency in the quarter, a 
2 point improvement from the third quarter of 2012 constant cur-
rency growth rate. Consistent with the company’s business model 
to move to higher value areas, revenue continued to grow in the 
higher margin businesses which contributed to the overall margin 
expansion and profit growth in the fourth quarter. 
	
On a geographic basis, revenue performance was led by the 
growth markets which increased 6.8 percent as reported and 7 per-
cent at constant currency. The BRIC countries delivered combined 
growth of 11.4 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency). In the 
fourth quarter, over 30 growth market countries grew constant 
currency revenue at a double-digit rate reflecting ongoing broad-
based strength. 
	
Within the company’s segments, performance was led by con-
tinued momentum in the growth initiatives and successful product 
launches in high-end systems—both of which drove a more profit-
able mix. Software revenue increased 3.5 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency), driven by business analytics, Smarter Com-
merce and cloud with strength in several emerging areas where the 
company has been targeting its investments—Social Business, 
mobile and security. Systems and Technology revenue declined 0.7 
percent (1 percent adjusted for currency); adjusted for the RSS 
divestiture, revenue increased 3.6 percent (4 percent adjusted for 
currency) versus the prior year. New product introductions per-
formed well in the quarter. System z revenue increased 55.6 percent 
(56 percent adjusted for currency) reflecting strong acceptance of 
the new mainframe. System z revenue increased over 50 percent 
in the major markets and over 65 percent in the growth markets. 
Global Services revenue decreased 2.1 percent (1 percent adjusted 
for currency) with the constant currency growth rate consistent with 
the third quarter of 2012. Global Services continued to have strong 
performance in all of the key growth initiatives which are becoming 
a larger part of the services business. 
	
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 1.8 points versus 
the fourth quarter of 2011 to 51.8 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) 
gross margin increased 2.1 points to 52.3 percent. The improvement 
was driven by a combination of strong mainframe growth, good 
margin expansion in both services segments and an improving seg-
ment mix due to the relative strength of software. 
	
Total expense and other income decreased 1.5 percent in the 
fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-
GAAP) expense and other income decreased 2.3 percent. The 
year-to-year drivers for both categories were approximately:
	
	
Total 	
Operating 
	
	
Consolidated 	
 (non-GAAP)
•	
Currency*	
(1)	 point 	
(1)	 point
•	
Acquisitions**	
2	 points	
2	 points
•	
Base expense	
(3)	 points	
(3)	points
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
Pre-tax income grew 7.7 percent and the pre-tax margin was 26.7 
percent, an increase of 2.1 points versus the fourth quarter of 
2011. Net income increased 6.3 percent and the net income 
margin increased 1.3 points to 19.9 percent. The effective tax rate 
for the fourth quarter was 25.5 percent, an increase of 1 point 
versus the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income grew 
9.5 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was 
27.7 percent, an increase of 2.6 points versus the prior year. Oper-
ating (non-GAAP) net income increased 9.5 percent and the 
operating (non-GAAP) net income margin was 20.9 percent, an 


===== PAGE 41 =====
40
40
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2012 versus the fourth quarter of 2011 reportable segment external revenue and gross 
margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arms-length transfer 
price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items. 
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$10,284
$10,452
(1.6)%
(0.3)%
Gross margin
37.6%
36.6%
1.1 pts.
Global Business Services
4,720
4,877
(3.2)%
(2.0)%
Gross margin
29.9%
29.3%
0.7 pts.
Software
7,915
7,648
3.5%
4.2%
Gross margin
90.6%
89.8%
0.8 pts.
Systems and Technology
5,763
5,803
(0.7)%
(0.6)%
Gross margin
44.1%
40.5%
3.6 pts.
Global Financing
535
548
(2.3)%
(0.9)%
Gross margin
43.8%
49.7%
(5.9) pts.
Other
87
159
(45.3)%
(45.1)%
Gross margin
(73.2)%
(11.0)%
(62.2) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$29,304
$29,486
(0.6)%
0.3%
Total consolidated gross profit
$15,167
$14,722
3.0%
Total consolidated gross margin
51.8%
49.9%
1.8 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
99
81
22.4%
Acquisition-related charges
0
0
50.8
Retirement-related costs/(income)
60
(10)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$15,327
$14,793
3.6%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
52.3%
50.2%
2.1 pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Global Services
The Global Services segments, Global Technology Services and 
Global Business Services delivered $15,004 million of revenue in the 
fourth quarter, a decrease of 2.1 percent (1 percent adjusted for cur-
rency) year to year. Overall revenue performance in the quarter was 
led by the growth markets with revenue up 5.8 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency). Total outsourcing revenue of $6,978 million 
decreased 3.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and total 
transactional revenue of $6,184 million decreased 1.0 percent (flat 
adjusted for currency) year over year. Total Global Services pre-tax 
income was $2,868 million, an increase of 3.5 percent year to 
year. The combined pre-tax margin improved 1 point year to year 
to 18.5 percent.
	
Global Technology Services revenue of $10,284 million decreased 
1.6 percent as reported, but was flat on a constant currency basis in 
the fourth quarter versus the same period in 2011. There were two 
major factors within the major markets that impacted outsourcing 
increase of 1.9 points compared to the prior year. The operating 
(non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 24.4 percent, flat compared to 
the fourth quarter of 2011. 
	
Diluted earnings per share of $5.13 increased $0.51 or 11.0 
percent from the fourth quarter of 2011. In the fourth quarter, the 
company repurchased 15.4 million shares of its common stock. 
Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share increased 
14.4 percent reflecting the growth in operating (non-GAAP) net 
income and the benefits of the common stock repurchase 
program. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of 
$5.39 increased $0.68 versus the fourth quarter of 2011 driven 
by the following factors:
•	
Revenue decrease at actual rates	
$	(0.03)
•	
Margin expansion	
$	0.47
•	
Common stock repurchases	
$	0.24
	
Margin expansion was the largest contributor to the growth in 
operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share in the fourth quarter. This 
was achieved through a combination of gross margin improvements 
and expense productivity.


===== PAGE 42 =====
41
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
revenue growth in the quarter. First, GTS did a tremendous amount 
of work to address a number of low margin contracts to improve the 
profitability of the outsourcing portfolio. The benefits of that work were 
realized in profit and margin performance, though it did have some 
impact on revenue. In the fourth quarter, the impact was 1 point of 
year-to-year revenue growth to GTS, and to Global Services in total. 
Second, revenue from sales and volumes into existing base accounts 
declined year to year in the fourth quarter. This activity tends to be 
more transactional in nature and economically sensitive. The impact 
of these factors are reflected in GTS Outsourcing revenue, which 
decreased 3.1 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth 
quarter. Outsourcing revenue in the growth markets increased 6.1 
percent, 8 percent at constant currency, and the outsourcing backlog 
in these markets was up 9 percent at constant currency. The backlog 
growth reflects an ongoing trend as clients are building out their infra-
structures and scaling to meet the growth objectives of their 
businesses. ITS revenue of $2,542 million increased 2.1 percent (3 
percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter with the growth 
markets up 10.1 percent (10 percent at constant currency). GTS gross 
profit increased 1.3 percent and the gross profit margin improved 1.1 
points to 37.6 percent with margin improvement across all lines of 
business. GTS fourth-quarter 2012 pre-tax income increased 5.0 
percent to $2,027 million with the pre-tax margin expanding 1.2 points 
to 19.2 percent, versus the fourth quarter of 2011. Margin expansion 
resulted from increased efficiency and productivity from the focus on 
automation and process, primarily through the company’s enterprise 
productivity initiatives. 
	
Global Business Services revenue of $4,720 million decreased 
3.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter 
of 2012. From a geographic perspective, the growth markets 
increased 2.0 percent (3 percent at constant currency) and Japan 
improved 0.3 percent (6 percent at constant currency)—the second 
consecutive quarter of revenue growth in Japan. The growth initia-
tives continued to drive strong performance with double-digit 
revenue growth in business analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud 
offerings in the quarter. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased 
3.8 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and C&SI revenue 
decreased 3.0 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency). GBS has 
been taking actions to address the more traditional customized 
packaged application work including: adding partners, increasing 
sales capability and targeting and closing large transformational 
opportunities in the growth markets. GBS gross profit decreased 
1.0 percent in the fourth quarter with the gross profit margin expanding 
0.7 points versus the prior year. GBS pre-tax income of $841 million 
was essentially flat year to year with a pre-tax margin of 17.2 percent, 
an improvement of 0.6 points. Improved utilization and improved 
services delivery more than offset the impact from revenue. 
Software
Software revenue of $7,915 million increased 3.5 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter with growth in all the key 
brands, and particular strength and share gains in WebSphere, 
Lotus and Rational. Key branded middleware revenue increased 
5.4 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) year to year and gained 
share as the software business continued to be the leader in 
the middleware market. The software business had continued 
momentum across its brands in the growth initiatives in the fourth 
quarter with strong performance in business analytics, Smarter 
Commerce and cloud. WebSphere revenue increased 10.6 percent 
(11 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter year to year 
and gained share. The company continued to expand its portfolio 
to capture the emerging opportunity around mobile computing and 
had solid revenue growth in several of its core WebSphere offerings, 
such as application servers and commerce in the fourth quarter. 
Information Management revenue increased 2.2 percent (3 percent 
adjusted for currency) and held share with strong performance in 
Information Integration and predictive analytics, both driven by big 
data. Tivoli revenue increased 4.3 percent (5 percent adjusted for 
currency) and held share, led by its storage and security offerings. 
Revenue from the storage portfolio increased 12 percent (13 percent 
adjusted for currency), reflecting the continued value of storage 
software. Tivoli security increased 16 percent (16 percent adjusted 
for currency) driven by Q1 Labs. Lotus revenue increased 8.6 per-
cent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and gained share as the Lotus 
portfolio continues to transform to the faster-growing social busi-
ness offerings. Revenue growth was driven by strong performance 
from the existing social business offerings and the recent acquisition 
of Kenexa, which closed in December 2012. Kenexa helps clients 
create a more efficient and effective workforce, and brings a unique 
combination of cloud-based technology and consulting services to 
an already extensive portfolio of social business solutions. Rational 
revenue increased 11.6 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) in 
the fourth quarter and gained share. Growth was driven by double-
digit growth in both analysis, modeling and design software and the 
Automated Software Quality business. Software gross profit 
increased 4.5 percent and the gross profit margin expanded 0.8 
points to 90.6 percent. Software delivered pre-tax income of $4,017 
million in the fourth quarter, a growth of 8.3 percent compared to 
the fourth quarter of 2011, with a pre-tax margin of 46.0 percent, up 
2.4 points.
Systems and Technology
Systems and Technology revenue of $5,763 million decreased 0.7 
percent (1 percent adjusted for currency); adjusted for the RSS 
divestiture, revenue increased 3.6 percent (4 percent adjusted for 
currency). Performance was driven by the company’s new main-
frame and momentum in PureSystems—the company’s new 
expert integrated systems. System z revenue increased 55.6 per-
cent (56 percent adjusted for currency) driven by the first full 
quarter of the new mainframe product. MIPS shipments increased 
66 percent year to year; the largest quarter of MIPS shipments in 
history. Approximately half of these MIPS were specialty engines, 
which were up over 80 percent year to year driven by Linux work-
loads. Revenue growth in System z was over 50 percent in the 
major markets and over 65 percent in the growth markets. In the 
growth markets, the company had strong sales to established as 
well as new mainframe customers. Power Systems revenue 
decreased 18.9 percent (19 percent adjusted for currency), 
although both the new POWER7+ midrange and high-end Power 
servers performed well in the quarter. In the fourth quarter, the 
company had over 350 competitive displacements resulting in over 
$335 million of business; approximately half of which came from 


===== PAGE 43 =====
42
42
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Oracle/Sun and half from Hewlett Packard. System x revenue 
decreased 2.5 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth 
quarter year to year. Storage hardware revenue decreased 5.4 per-
cent (5 percent adjusted for currency) driven by tape products. Total 
tape revenue decreased 23 percent (23 percent adjusted for cur-
rency) while total disk revenue was essentially flat year to year. Within 
disk, the company announced the new high-end DS8870 in October 
2012, and the product was sold out in the fourth quarter. Systems 
and Technology gross margin increased 3.6 points to 44.1 percent 
driven primarily by a mix to the higher margin System z in the fourth 
quarter of 2012. Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income 
increased 23.2 percent to $974 million in the fourth quarter and the 
pre-tax margin increased 3.2 points to 16.4 percent. Systems and 
Technology’s profit performance was driven by the new product 
introductions in mainframe, Power, Storage and PureSystems. 
Global Financing
Global Financing revenue of $535 million decreased 2.3 percent (1 
percent adjusted for currency), driven by a decrease in financing 
revenue, partially offset by an increase in used equipment sales 
revenue. The Global Financing fourth-quarter pre-tax income 
increased 0.7 percent to $518 million and the pre-tax margin 
increased 0.9 points to 46.9 percent. 
Geographic Revenue
Total geographic revenue of $28,624 million decreased 0.5 percent 
(flat adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter of 2012 compared 
to the prior year. Americas revenue of $12,550 million increased 0.3 
percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, led by strong 
growth in Latin America (up 13.5 percent as reported and 18 percent 
adjusted for currency). The U.S. was down 0.7 percent, but the 
growth rate improved 3 points compared to the third quarter of 2012. 
Canada was down 6.2 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) 
compared to strong year-to-year growth of 13 percent at constant 
currency in the fourth quarter of 2011. EMEA revenue of $9,091 
million decreased 5.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), 
reflecting the macroeconomic climate in that region. Germany was 
down 7.0 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) and the UK was 
down 4.7 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency). Italy revenue 
decreased 3.4 percent (flat adjusted for currency), an improvement 
sequentially from the third-quarter constant currency growth rate. 
Asia Pacific revenue of $6,984 million increased 4.2 percent (5 per-
cent adjusted for currency) led by Japan, which returned to growth 
(0.2 percent as reported, 5 percent at constant currency) in the 
fourth quarter of 2012. Across all geographies, revenue from the 
growth markets increased 6.8 percent (7 percent adjusted for cur-
rency) in the fourth quarter and outpaced growth in the major 
markets by 9 points on a constant currency basis. Revenue perfor-
mance was again broad based with over 30 growth market 
countries delivering double-digit revenue growth year to year, 
adjusted for currency. Within the BRIC countries, combined revenue 
increased 11.4 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency), the stron-
gest quarterly growth in 2012. Brazil returned to growth in the fourth 
quarter with revenue up 15.5 percent (24 percent adjusted for cur-
rency). The growth markets also had good performance in Africa, 
led by South Africa, and in the Middle East.
	
OEM revenue of $679 million in the fourth quarter decreased 
4.9 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the 
prior year.
Total Expense and Other Income
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2012
2011
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$7,336
$7,448
(1.5)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(86)
(72)
19.6
Acquisition-related charges
(12)
(13)
(8.2)
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(23)
25
NM
Total operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$7,215
$7,388
(2.3)%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
25.0%
25.3%
(0.2) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
24.6%
25.1%
(0.4) pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Total expense and other income decreased 1.5 percent year to year 
in the fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue-ratio of 25.0 per-
cent compared to 25.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011. Total 
operating (non-GAAP) expense and other income decreased 2.3 
percent in the fourth quarter. The decrease in total expense and 
other income was primarily driven by lower base expense (3 points) 
and currency (1 point), partially offset by increased expense from 
the company’s acquisitions over the past 12 months (2 points). 
Within Selling, general and administrative expense, accounts receiv-
able provisions were approximately $20 million in the fourth quarter 
of 2012 an improvement of nearly $70 million from the fourth quarter 
of 2011 when provisions were increased to reflect the European 
credit environment.
Cash Flow
The company generated $6,346 million in cash flow provided by 
operating activities, a decrease of $751 million compared to the 
fourth quarter of 2011, driven primarily by an increase in cash used 
in operating assets and liabilities ($889 million). Net cash used in 
investing activities of $4,092 million increased $587 million primarily 
due to an increase in cash used by non-operating finance receiv-
ables ($501 million) and an increase in cash used from net purchases 
of marketable securities and other investments ($300 million). Net 
cash used in financing activities of $3,791 million increased $982 
million compared to the prior year primarily due to a net decrease 
in cash from total debt ($1,397 million); partially offset by a decrease 
in cash used for gross common stock repurchases ($575 million).


===== PAGE 44 =====
43
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled 
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale 
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter 2012:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$15,167
$ 100
$    60
$15,327
Gross profit margin
51.8%
0.3 pts.
0.2 pts.
52.3%
SG&A
$  5,921
$  (91)
$   (29)
$  5,801
RD&E
1,580
0
6
1,586
Other (income) and expense
(47)
(7)
0
(54)
Total expense and other (income)
7,336
(98)
(23)
7,215
Pre-tax income 
7,831
198
83
8,112
Pre-tax income margin
26.7%
0.7 pts.
0.3 pts.
27.7%
Provision for income taxes*
$  1,998
$  (45)
$    30
$  1,983
Effective tax rate
25.5%
(1.2) pts.
0.1 pts.
24.4%
Net income
$  5,833
$ 243
$    53
$  6,129
Net income margin
19.9%
0.8 pts.
0.2 pts.
20.9%
Diluted earnings per share
$    5.13
$0.21
$ 0.05
$    5.39
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective 
tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter 2011:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$14,722 
$   81 
$   (10)
$14,793 
Gross profit margin
49.9%
0.3 pts.
(0.0) pts.
50.2%
SG&A
$  6,076
$  (82)
$      2
$  5,996
RD&E
1,555
0
23
1,578
Other (income) and expense
(44)
(2)
0
(46)
Total expense and other (income)
7,448
(85)
25
7,388
Pre-tax income 
7,274
166
(35)
7,405
Pre-tax income margin
24.7%
0.6 pts.
(0.1) pts.
25.1%
Provision for income taxes*
$  1,784
$   47
$   (24)
$  1,808
Effective tax rate
24.5%
0.1 pts.
(0.2) pts.
24.4%
Net income
$  5,490
$ 119
$   (12)
$  5,597
Net income margin
18.6%
0.4 pts.
(0.0) pts.
19.0%
Diluted earnings per share
$    4.62
$0.10
$(0.01)
$    4.71
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective 
tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 45 =====
44
44
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Prior Year in Review
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the 
company’s financial performance in 2011 as compared to 2010. 
For a detailed discussion of prior-year performance, see the 2011 
Annual Report.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$106,916
$  99,870 
7.1%*
Gross profit margin
46.9%
46.1%
0.8 pts.
Total expense and other income
$  29,135
$  26,291
10.8%
Total expense and other  
income-to-revenue ratio
27.3%
26.3%
0.9 pts.
Income before income taxes
$  21,003
$  19,723
6.5%
Provision for income taxes
5,148
4,890
5.3%
Net income
$  15,855
$  14,833
6.9%
Net income margin
14.8%
14.9%
0.0 pts.
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    13.06
$    11.52
13.4%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,213.8
1,287.4
(5.7)%
Assets**
$116,433
$113,452
2.6%
Liabilities**
$  96,197
$  90,279
6.6%
Equity**
$  20,236
$  23,172
(12.7)%
  * 3.4 percent adjusted for currency. 
** At December 31.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for 2011 and 2010. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$15,855
$14,833 
6.9%
Non-operating adjustments  
(net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
495
443
12.0
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
(32)
(253)
(87.3)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$16,318
$15,023
8.6%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
earnings per share
$  13.44
$  11.67
15.2%
 * See page 54 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
Snapshot
In 2011, the company delivered strong financial results highlighted 
by solid revenue performance, continued margin expansion, strong 
profit and cash generation and effective use of cash. In its centennial 
year, the company achieved record levels of revenue, profit, free cash 
flow and earnings per share. The financial performance was the 
result of the transformation of the company which began years ago. 
This transformation has been focused on shifting the business to 
higher value areas of the market, improving productivity and invest-
ing in opportunities to drive future growth. These changes have 
contributed to nine consecutive years of double-digit earnings per 
share growth. More importantly, this transformation has strength-
ened the business and put the company on track to achieve its 
2015 road map objective of at least $20 of operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share. 
	
The focus on key growth initiatives and investments in innova-
tion have enabled the company to expand into new markets and 
capitalize on trends like business analytics and cloud computing. 
The growth markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out 
IT infrastructures and lead in specific industries is driving strong 
performance and market share gains. Growth markets revenue 
increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 
contributing approximately two-thirds of the total constant currency 
revenue growth for the year and represented 22 percent of total 
geographic revenue. The company’s business analytics solutions 
helps clients leverage massive amounts of data and content to gain 
business insight and optimize results. Business analytics revenue 
increased 16 percent compared to 2010. The Smarter Planet offer-
ings generated close to 50 percent growth year to year, with Smarter 
Commerce demonstrating strong market momentum. In Cloud 
Computing, the company is helping its clients improve the economics 
of information technology. In 2011, the company continued to 
expand its offerings and cloud revenue for the year was more than 
three times the prior year results. With strong contribution from 
these growth initiatives, the company delivered revenue growth of 
7.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2010.
	
Segment performance was led by Software which increased 
revenue 10.9 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key 
branded middleware which increased 15.6 percent (13 percent 
adjusted for currency) and continued to extend its lead in the middle-
ware market. In the Global Services business, Global Technology 
Services increased 7.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) 
and Global Business Services grew revenue 5.8 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency) driven by strong performance in the growth 
markets where both segments grew revenue 11 percent at constant 
currency. Systems and Technology delivered revenue growth of 
5.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) driven by strong per-
formance in Power Systems which increased 12.0 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) and the growth markets which increased 
14.9 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency). 


===== PAGE 46 =====
45
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 0.8 points versus 
2010 to 46.9 percent. This was the eighth consecutive year of 
improvement in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP) 
gross margin of 47.2 percent increased 1.1 points compared to the 
prior year. The increase in gross margin in 2011 was driven by margin 
improvements in Software, Systems and Technology and Global 
Services, and an improved revenue mix driven by Software. 
	
Total expense and other income increased 10.8 percent in 2011 
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other 
income increased 10.2 percent compared to the prior year. The year-
to-year drivers for both categories were approximately:
•	
Currency*	
4	 points
•	
Acquisitions**	 3	 points
•	
Base expense 	 3	 points
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
Pre-tax income grew 6.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was 
19.6 percent, a decrease of 0.1 points versus 2010. Net income 
increased 6.9 percent and the net income margin was 14.8 percent, 
flat versus 2010. The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent, 
compared with 24.8 percent in the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) 
pre-tax income grew 8.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) 
pre-tax margin was 20.2 percent, an increase of 0.3 points versus 
the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) earnings increased 8.6 percent 
and the operating (non-GAAP) earnings margin of 15.3 percent 
increased 0.2 points versus the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) 
effective tax rate was 24.5 percent versus 24.4 percent in 2010.
 	
Diluted earnings per share improved 13.4 percent reflecting the 
growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock repur-
chase program. In 2011, the company repurchased approximately 89 
million shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share of 
$13.06 increased $1.54 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) 
diluted earnings per share of $13.44 increased $1.77 versus 2010 
driven by the following factors:
•	
Revenue increase at actual rates	
$0.82
•	
Margin expansion 	
$0.18
•	
Common stock repurchases	
$0.77
At December 31, 2011, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity 
were well positioned to support the company’s objectives. Cash 
and cash equivalents at year end was $11,922 million. Key drivers 
in the balance sheet and total cash flows are highlighted below.
	
Total assets increased $2,981 million ($4,636 million adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by: 
•	
Increases in total receivables ($1,564 million), cash and  
cash equivalents ($1,262 million), goodwill ($1,077 million)  
and prepaid expenses and other assets ($1,022 million),  
partially offset by
•	
Decreases in marketable securities ($990 million) and  
investments and sundry assets ($883 million).
Total liabilities increased $5,918 million ($6,324 million adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by:
•	
Increases in total debt ($2,695 million), retirement and  
nonpension postretirement benefit obligations ($2,396 million), 
accounts payable ($713 million) and deferred income  
($798 million), partially offset by
•	
Decreases in taxes payable ($903 million).
Total equity of $20,236 million decreased $2,937 million from 
December 31, 2010 as a result of:
•	
Increased treasury stock ($14,803 million) driven by  
share repurchases, pension adjustments ($2,448 million)  
and currency translation adjustments ($711 million),  
partially offset by
•	
Higher retained earnings ($12,326 million) and common  
stock ($2,711 million).
The company generated $19,846 million in cash flow from opera-
tions, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010, primarily driven 
by the increase in net income. Net cash used in investing activities 
of $4,396 million was $4,111 million lower than 2010, driven by less 
cash used for acquisitions ($4,111 million). Net cash used in financing 
activities of $13,696 million was $1,267 million higher, compared to 
2010, primarily due to lower cash from common stock transactions 
($991 million) and increased dividend payments ($296 million).


===== PAGE 47 =====
46
46
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2011 and 2010 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external 
revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an 
arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$  40,879 
$38,201 
7.0%
2.7%
Gross margin
35.0%
34.5%
0.5 pts.
Global Business Services
19,284
18,223
5.8%
1.5%
Gross margin
28.8%
28.0%
0.7 pts.
Software
24,944
22,485
10.9%
8.0%
Gross margin
88.5%
87.9%
0.5 pts.
Systems and Technology
18,985
17,973
5.6%
3.2%
Gross margin
39.8%
38.1%
1.6 pts.
Global Financing
2,102
2,238
(6.1)%
(9.1)%
Gross margin
49.8%
51.3%
(1.5 ) pts.
Other
722
750
(3.8)%
(6.3)%
Gross margin
(54.5)%
(8.6)%
(45.9) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$106,916 
$99,870 
7.1%
3.4%
Total consolidated gross profit
$  50,138
$46,014
9.0%
Total consolidated gross margin
46.9%
46.1%
0.8 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
340
260
30.8%
Acquisition-related charges
1
0
NM
Retirement-related costs/(income)
2
(204)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$  50,481 
$46,070
9.6%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
47.2%
46.1%
1.1 pts.
NM—Not meaningful
The Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) transaction gain recorded 
in the first quarter of 2010 impacted the year-to-year results of 
the company’s reportable segments for 2011 compared to 2010. In 
addition, workforce rebalancing charges were incurred in every 
segment in the first quarter of both years. The PLM transaction gain 
($591 million) was recorded in Software in the first quarter of 2010. 
In the segment analysis on page 47, each segment’s pre-tax income 
and pre-tax margin for 2011 and 2010 is presented on an as-
reported basis and on a basis normalized for these actions in both 
years to provide a better perspective of the underlying operational 
performance of the segments.


===== PAGE 48 =====
47
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
The Global Services segments, GTS and GBS, delivered $60,163 
million of revenue in 2011, an increase of 6.6 percent (2 percent 
adjusted for currency) compared to 2010. Services revenue per-
formance, adjusted for currency, was consistent over the course 
of the year driven by stability in the backlog. Performance in 2011 
was led by strength in the growth markets with total services rev-
enue up 16.9 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency) and gross 
GTS revenue of $40,879 million increased 7.0 percent (3 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Revenue performance 
was led by the growth markets which were up 16.8 percent (11 per-
cent adjusted for currency). GTS Outsourcing revenue increased 7.5 
percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 and gained share. 
Outsourcing performance in 2011 was driven by strength in the 
growth markets with revenue up 11 percent, adjusted for currency, 
as the outsourcing offerings are continuing to help clients build out 
their IT infrastructures. ITS revenue increased 8.5 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, also led by the growth 
markets which increased 13 percent, adjusted for currency. Revenue 
growth year over year, adjusted for currency, in both GTS Outsourc-
ing and ITS was relatively consistent over the course of the year. 
	
GBS revenue of $19,284 million increased 5.8 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 led by strength in the growth markets 
with revenue up 17.4 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency). 
Application Outsourcing revenue increased 9.5 percent (5 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 year to year. C&SI, which includes 
Consulting, Application Management Services systems integration 
and the U.S. Federal business, grew revenue in 2011 4.8 percent (1 
percent adjusted for currency). Both GBS lines of business had 
strong year-to-year performance in the growth markets with double-
digit constant currency revenue growth. GBS was impacted in 2011 
by revenue declines in Japan and in the Public Sector; excluding 
Japan and the Public Sector, total GBS revenue increased 11.9 
percent in 2011 (8 percent adjusted for currency). 
margin 2 points higher than in the major markets. The services 
segments also had good performance in the other key growth 
initiatives: cloud, business analytics and Smarter Planet. Total out-
sourcing revenue of $28,301 million increased 7.8 percent (3 
percent adjusted for currency) and total transactional revenue of 
$24,348 million increased 6.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) year to year.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Global Services
Global Technology Services
External gross profit
$14,320 
$13,194 
8.5%
External gross profit margin
35.0%
34.5%
0.5 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  6,284
$  5,499
14.3%
Pre-tax margin
14.9%
13.9%
1.0 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized*
$  6,399
$  5,771
10.9%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
15.2%
14.6%
0.6 pts.
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$  5,545
$  5,106
8.6%
External gross profit margin
28.8%
28.0%
0.7 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  3,006
$  2,546
18.1%
Pre-tax margin
15.0%
13.4%
1.6 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized**
$  3,052
$  2,674
14.1%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
15.2%
14.1%
1.1 pts.
  * Excludes $116 million and $273 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
** Excludes $45 million and $128 million of workforce rebalancing charges in 	the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively. ­
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Global Services external revenue
$60,163 
$56,424 
6.6%
2.3%
Global Technology Services
$40,879 
$38,201 
7.0%
2.7%
Outsourcing
23,911
22,241
7.5
3.0
Integrated Technology Services
9,453
8,714
8.5
4.1
Maintenance
7,515
7,250
3.6
(0.2)
Global Business Services
$19,284
$18,223
5.8%
1.5%
Outsourcing
4,390
4,007
9.5
4.8
Consulting and Systems Integration
14,895 
14,216 
4.8
0.5


===== PAGE 49 =====
48
48
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
GTS gross profit increased 8.5 percent in 2011 and gross margin 
improved 0.5 points year to year. Margin expansion was driven by 
improved gross profit performance in all lines of business. Pre-tax 
income increased to $6,284 million in 2011 with a pre-tax margin of 
14.9 percent. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income in 
2011 increased 10.9 percent and margin expanded 0.6 points to 
15.2 percent. 
	
GBS gross profit increased 8.6 percent in 2011 and gross margin 
improved 0.7 points to 28.8 percent, led primarily by margin 
improvement in Application Management Services Outsourcing. 
GBS segment pre-tax income improved 18.1 percent to $3,006 million 
with a pre-tax margin of 15.0 percent. On a normalized basis, 
segment pre-tax income in 2011 increased 14.1 percent with a 
pre-tax margin of 15.2 percent, an increase of 1.1 points year to year. 
	
Total Global Services segment pre-tax income was $9,290 mil-
lion in 2011, an increase of $1,246 million or 15.5 percent year to year. 
The combined pre-tax margin in 2011 improved 1.2 points versus 
2010. On a normalized basis, total Global Services pre-tax income 
in 2011 increased 11.9 percent with a pre-tax margin of 15.2 percent, 
up 0.8 points year to year. In 2011, the company established two 
Global Services integration hubs which will drive the business to a 
new level of global consistency, integration and standardization in 
the development and delivery of solutions to clients. Both Global 
Services segments had strong profit and margin performance in 
2011 as they continued to mix to higher value offerings and markets, 
and continued to focus on productivity and cost management.
Software
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Software external revenue
$24,944 
$22,485 
10.9%
8.0%
Middleware
$20,650 
$18,445 
12.0%
9.0%
Key Branded Middleware
16,051
13,879
15.6
12.7
WebSphere
40.5
37.4
Information Management
12.5
9.6
Lotus
3.8
0.2
Tivoli
10.2
7.4
Rational
4.9
1.8
Other middleware
4,600
4,565
0.8
(1.9)
Operating systems
2,479
2,282
8.6
5.6
Other
1,814
1,758
3.2
0.4
Software revenue of $24,944 million increased 10.9 percent (8 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. Adjusting for the 
divested PLM operations, revenue grew at 11.8 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011. Revenue growth was driven by key 
branded middleware, reflecting continued strong demand for the 
company’s offerings and solid growth in key focus areas such as 
Smarter Commerce and business analytics. Overall, the Software 
business had another very good year in 2011, delivering nearly 
$10 billion in segment pre-tax income, an increase of $500 million 
from 2010. The company continued to invest in additional capabilities 
for the Software business through both organic investments and 
strategic acquisitions, including the completion of five acquisitions in 
2011, plus acquisitions announced in the fourth quarter of 2011 that 
closed in the first quarter of 2012. 
	
Key branded middleware revenue increased 15.6 percent 
(13 percent adjusted for currency) and again gained market share in 
2011, as the Software business extended its lead in the middleware 
market. Software revenue continued to mix to the faster growing 
branded middleware which accounted for 64 percent of total soft-
ware revenue in 2011, an increase of 3 points from 2010. Performance 
in 2011 was led by strong double-digit growth in WebSphere. The 
Software business continued to have solid performance in its 
growth initiatives, with business analytics revenue up double digits 
in 2011 year to year. 
	
WebSphere revenue increased 40.5 percent (37 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 with strong performance throughout 
the year and gained share. WebSphere’s five product areas all had 
revenue growth of 18 percent or higher in 2011, led by the Smarter 
Commerce offerings, which more than tripled year to year. This per-
formance contributed to the company’s overall growth in the retail 
industry in each of the last two years. The 2010 acquisitions of 
Sterling Commerce, Coremetrics and Unica Corporation all contrib-
uted to the WebSphere year-to-year performance.


===== PAGE 50 =====
49
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Information Management revenue increased 12.5 percent 
(10 percent adjusted for currency) and gained share in 2011 com-
pared to 2010. Distributed Database revenue increased 33 percent 
in 2011, led by strong performance from the Netezza offerings. 
Since acquiring Netezza in November 2010, the Software business 
has expanded the Netezza customer base by over 40 percent. The 
company’s business analytics software offerings, most of which 
are part of Information Management, continued to outpace the 
market with double-digit revenue growth, year to year in 2011. 
	
Lotus revenue increased 3.8 percent (flat adjusted for currency) 
in 2011 compared to 2010, with growth driven by the Social Business 
offerings. 
	
Tivoli revenue increased 10.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 when compared to 2010 and gained share. Rev-
enue growth was led by Storage software with growth of 25 percent 
(22 percent adjusted for currency). Security solutions software 
also delivered growth in 2011, with revenue up 9 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency). 
	
Rational revenue increased 4.9 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 versus 2010 and gained share. Revenue growth 
was driven by Telelogic, which increased 11 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency) year to year. 
	
Operating systems revenue increased 8.6 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010, driven primarily by 
growth in Power Systems. 
	
Other software revenue increased 3.2 percent (flat adjusted for 
currency) with growth in software-related services partially offset 
by the divestiture of the PLM operations in the first quarter of 2010. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Software
External gross profit
$22,065 
$19,774 
11.6%
External gross profit margin
88.5%
87.9%
0.5 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  9,970
$  9,466
5.3%
Pre-tax margin
35.3%
37.2%
(1.9 )pts.
Pre-tax income-normalized*
$10,009
$  8,972
11.6%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
35.5%
35.3%
0.2 pts.
* Excludes $39 million and $98 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively, and $(591) million related to the PLM gain in the 
first quarter of 2010.
Software gross profit increased 11.6 percent to $22,065 million in 
2011 driven primarily by the growth in revenue. Gross profit margin 
improved 0.5 points versus 2010. Software delivered segment 
pre-tax income of $9,970 million in 2011, an increase of 5.3 percent 
versus 2010. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income 
increased 11.6 percent and segment pre-tax margin improved 
0.2 points to 35.5 percent in 2011. The Software segment delivered 
strong margin and profit growth in 2011 and contributed to the 
company’s continued margin expansion and profit performance.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011*
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue
$18,985 
$17,973 
5.6%
3.2%
System z
0.3%
(2.1)%
Power Systems
12.0
9.5
System x
5.7
2.4
Storage
5.8
3.1
Total Systems excluding Retail Store Solutions
6.3
3.5
Microelectronics OEM
0.2
0.1
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions
5.4
3.0
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012)
11.6
9.4
* Reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation.
Systems and Technology revenue increased 5.6 percent (3 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Performance in 2011 
was driven by the growth markets which increased 14.9 percent 
(12 percent adjusted for currency). The major markets increased 
2.7 percent, but were essentially flat at constant currency versus 
the prior year period. 
 
	
System z revenue increased 0.3 percent (down 2 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. MIPS shipments 
increased 16 percent in 2011 versus 2010. The revenue performance 
and lower MIPS growth was a result of the strong prior-year perfor-
mance and was consistent with prior mainframe product cycles, as 
the company successfully launched its zEnterprise 196 (z196) server 
in the third quarter of 2010. Since the z196 server began shipping, 
the company added over 115 new System z clients, with more than 
33 percent in the growth markets through year-end 2011.


===== PAGE 51 =====
50
50
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis. 
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately on 
page 51.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total revenue
$106,916 
$99,870 
7.1%
3.4%
Geographies
$104,170 
$97,060 
7.3%
3.6%
Americas
44,944
42,044
6.9
6.2
Europe/Middle East/Africa
33,952
31,866
6.5
1.6
Asia Pacific
25,273
23,150
9.2
1.7
Major markets
5.1%
1.6%
Growth markets
16.0%
11.4%
BRIC countries
18.6%
16.1%
Total geographic revenue increased 7.3 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) to $104,170 million in 2011, led by strong performance in 
the growth markets. 
	
Power Systems revenue increased 12.0 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010 with performance driven 
by strong growth in high-end systems. High-end systems revenue 
increased 31 percent (28 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 com-
pared to 2010. The company extended its market leadership in 2011, 
having posted 15 consecutive quarters of year-to-year share gains. 
In addition, this was the second consecutive year that the company 
had over 1,000 competitive displacements, which this year gener-
ated over $1 billion of business; approximately 50 percent of this 
business was from Hewlett Packard, with most of the balance from 
Oracle/Sun.
	
System x revenue increased 5.7 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. High-end System x revenue 
increased 35 percent (31 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 
versus the prior year. System x revenue increased 22 percent (18 
percent adjusted for currency) in the growth markets and closed the 
year with its ninth consecutive quarter with a double-digit increase 
in the growth markets.
	
Storage revenue increased 5.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Total disk revenue increased 7 percent 
(4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, driven by 
growth in enterprise disk products. Tape revenue increased 3 per-
cent (flat adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. When combined 
with storage software, total storage revenue increased 10 percent 
in 2011 compared to the prior year. 
	
Retail Stores Solutions revenue increased 11.6 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus the prior year. The brand gained 
share in 2011 and contributed to the company’s overall improved 
performance in the retail industry. 
	
Microelectronics OEM revenue increased 0.2 percent (flat 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, as the company shifted 
its production to meet internal demand. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Systems and Technology
External gross profit
$7,555 
$6,856 
10.2%
External gross profit margin
39.8%
38.1%
1.6 pts.
Pre-tax income
$1,633 
$1,456 
12.2%
Pre-tax margin
8.2%
7.8%
0.5 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized*
$1,652 
$1,513 
9.2%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
8.3%
8.1%
0.3 pts.
 * Excludes $19 million and $57 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively. 
The increase in external gross profit in 2011 versus 2010 was due to 
higher revenue and an improved overall gross profit margin.
	
Overall gross margin increased 1.6 points in 2011 versus the prior 
year. The increase was primarily driven by margin improvements 
in Power Systems (1.2 points), System z (0.4 points) and System x 
(0.6 points), partially offset by lower margins in Microelectronics 
(0.6 points) and Storage (0.2 points). 
	
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income increased $177 
million (12.2 percent) to $1,633 million in 2011 and on a normalized 
basis increased $139 million to $1,652 million in 2011, when com-
pared to the prior year. Pre-tax margin increased 0.5 points, and on 
a normalized basis 0.3 points, versus the prior year. 
Global Financing
See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s 
segment results.


===== PAGE 52 =====
51
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total Expense and Other Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$29,135 
$26,291 
10.8%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(289)
(253)
14.4
Acquisition-related charges
(45)
(46)
(1.8)
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
74
210
(64.6) 
Total operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$28,875
$26,202
10.2%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
27.3%
26.3%
0.9 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
27.0%
26.2%
0.8 pts.
Total expense and other (income) increased 10.8 percent in 2011 
versus 2010. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other 
(income) increased 10.2 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers 
of the year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) for 
both expense presentations were approximately:
•	
Currency*	
4	 points
•	
Acquisitions**	
3	 points
•	
Base expense	 3	 points
  *Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
For additional information regarding total expense and other income, 
see the following analyses by category.
	
The growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2011 and gained 4 points of market share. The 
growth markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out IT 
infrastructures and lead in specific industries has driven the strong 
performance and share gains. Revenue growth outpaced growth 
in the major markets by 10 points in 2011 on a constant currency 
basis. In the BRIC countries, revenue increased 18.6 percent (16 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2011, with double-digit growth in 
each country. Overall in 2011, the company had double-digit constant 
currency revenue growth in nearly 40 growth market countries. 
These countries contributed nearly two-thirds of the company’s 2011 
constant currency revenue growth and represented 22 percent of 
total geographic revenue in 2011. To further drive market expansion, 
the company opened 92 new branches and added over 1,500 new 
sales resources in 2011.
	
Americas revenue increased 6.9 percent (6 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2011. Within the major market countries, the U.S. 
increased 4.2 percent and Canada increased 14.3 percent (10 percent 
adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin America growth markets 
increased 16.9 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) with 
growth in Brazil of 13.0 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency).
	
EMEA revenue increased 6.5 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. In the major market countries, 
revenue growth was led by the UK up 9.4 percent (5 percent adjusted 
for currency), Spain up 11.2 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency), 
Germany up 5.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) and 
France up 4.4 percent (flat adjusted for currency). Revenue in Italy 
decreased 0.6 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency). The EMEA 
growth markets increased 11.6 percent (10 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011, led by growth in Russia of 49.8 percent (49 percent 
adjusted for currency). 
	
Asia Pacific revenue increased 9.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) year over year. The Asia Pacific growth markets increased 
16.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), led by growth in 
China of 21.6 percent (18 percent adjusted for currency) and India 
of 10.9 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). Japan revenue 
increased 2.0 percent (decreased 7 percent adjusted for currency).
	
OEM revenue of $2,746 million in 2011 decreased 2.3 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2010, driven by the 
Microelectronics OEM business.


===== PAGE 53 =====
52
52
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction  
losses/(gains)
$513
$ 303
69.2%
(Gains)/losses on  
derivative instruments
(113)
(239)
(52.9)
Interest income
(136)
(92)
48.4
Net (gains)/losses from securities  
and investment assets
(227)
31
NM
Other
(58)
(790)
(92.7)
Total consolidated other  
(income) and expense
$ (20)
$(787)
(97.4)%
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related charges
(25)
(4)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) other 
(income) and expense
$ (45)
$(791)
(94.3)%
NM—Not meaningful
Other (income) and expense was income of $20 million and 
$787 million for 2011 and 2010, respectively. The decrease in income 
in 2011 was primarily driven by the net gain ($591 million) from the 
PLM transaction recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and a net gain 
associated with the disposition of a joint venture in the third quarter 
of 2010 ($57 million) reflected in Other in the table above. In addition, 
foreign currency rate volatility drove higher foreign currency transac-
tion losses ($210 million) and lower gains on derivative instruments 
($126 million). These decreases in income were partially offset by 
higher net gains from securities and investment asset sales ($258 
million), primarily in the first quarter of 2011.
Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated research, 
development and engineering
$6,258 
$6,026 
3.8%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
88
126
(30.4)
Operating (non-GAAP) research, 
development and engineering
$6,345 
$6,152 
3.1%
The company continues to invest in research and development, 
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities 
and to extend its technology leadership. Total RD&E expense 
increased 3.8 percent in 2011 versus 2010, primarily driven by acqui-
sitions (up 4 points) and currency impacts (up 2 points), partially 
offset by base expense (down 2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) 
RD&E expense increased 3.1 percent in 2011 compared to the 
prior year primarily driven by the same factors. RD&E investments 
represented 5.9 percent of revenue in 2011, compared to 6.0 percent 
in 2010.
Selling, General and Administrative
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and  
administrative  expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$20,287 
$18,585 
9.2%
Advertising and promotional expense
1,373
1,337
2.7
Workforce rebalancing charges
440
641
(31.3)
Retirement-related costs
603
494
22.1
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
289
253
14.4
Stock-based compensation
514
488
5.4
Bad debt expense
88
40
116.6
Total consolidated selling, general 
and administrative expense
$23,594
$21,837
8.0%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(289)
(253)
14.4
Acquisition-related charges
(20)
(41)
(52.3)
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(13)
84
NM
Operating (non-GAAP)  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$23,272
$21,628
7.6%
NM—Not meaningful
Total SG&A expense increased 8.0 percent (5 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Overall the increase was driven by 
currency impacts (3 points), acquisition-related spending (3 points) 
and base expense (2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense 
increased 7.6 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) primarily 
driven by the same factors. Workforce rebalancing charges 
decreased $201 million due primarily to actions taken in the first 
quarter of 2010 ($558 million). Bad debt expense increased $47 
million in 2011 primarily due to higher receivable balances and the 
economic environment in Europe. The accounts receivable provision 
coverage was 1.5 percent at December 31, 2011, a decrease of 30 
basis points from year-end 2010.


===== PAGE 54 =====
53
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Sales and other transfers of 
intellectual property
$   309
$   203
52.3%
Licensing/royalty-based fees
211
312
(32.5)
Custom development income
588
638
(8.0)
Total
$1,108 
$1,154 
(4.0)%
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may 
vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing of 
divestitures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and the 
timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no 
significant individual IP transactions in 2011 or 2010.
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense 
Total
$411
$368
11.6%
The increase in interest expense in 2011 versus 2010 was primarily 
driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower average 
interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in 
the Consolidated State­ment of Earnings only if the related external 
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business. 
See pages 66 and 67 for additional information regarding Global 
Financing debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense 
(excluding capitalized interest) for 2011 was $964 million, an increase 
of $41 million year to year.
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent compared with 
24.8 percent in 2010. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2011 
was 24.5 percent compared with 24.4 percent in 2010. The 0.3 point 
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven 
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax earnings (0.6 points), 
the lack of prior year impacts related to certain intercompany pay-
ments made by foreign subsidiaries (6.6 points) and a reduced 
impact associated with the intercompany licensing of certain intel-
lectual property and acquisition integration costs (2.2 points). These 
benefits were offset by a decrease in the utilization of foreign tax 
credits (3.7 points) and a decrease in the benefits associated with 
the settlements of the U.S. federal income tax audit (5.5 points). 
The remaining items were individually insignificant.
Financial Position
Cash and cash equivalents at year end was $11,922 million, an 
increase of $271 million from the prior year-end position. During 
2011, the company continued to manage its investment portfolio 
to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives, which 
resulted in a shift to higher rated institutions. At year end, a signifi-
cant portion of the investment portfolio was invested in U.S. 
sovereign instruments with no holdings of European sovereign debt 
securities. 
	
Total debt of $31,320 million increased $2,695 million from 
the prior year-end level. The commercial paper balance at 
December 31, 2011 was $2,300 million, an increase of $1,156 million 
from the prior year. Within total debt, $23,332 million is in support 
of the Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 
ratio. The company continued to have substantial flexibility in the 
market. During 2011, the company completed bond issuances 
totaling $4,850 million, with terms ranging from three to 10 years 
and priced from 0.875 to 2.90 percent depending on the maturity. 
In addition, the company renewed its $10 billion global credit facility 
for five years, with 100 percent of the facility available on a same 
day basis. 
	
Consistent with accounting standards the company remeasured 
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at 
December 31. At December 31, 2011, the overall net underfunded 
position was $16,389 million, an increase of $2,654 million from 
December 31, 2010 as the increase in the benefit obligation due to 
the reduction in discount rates more than offset the returns on plan 
assets. At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans 
were well funded and its cash requirements related to these plans 
remained stable going forward. In 2011, the return on the U.S. 
Personal Pension Plan assets was 8.4 percent and the plan was 
98 percent funded. Overall, global asset returns were 6.1 percent and 
the company’s qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 96 
percent funded.
	
The company’s qualified defined benefit plans do hold European 
sovereign debt securities in their trust funds. See note S, “Retire-
ment-Related Benefits,” on page 128 for additional information. 
	
During 2011, the company generated $19,846 million in cash from 
operations, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010. In addi-
tion, the company generated $16,604 million in free cash flow in 
2011, an increase of $305 million over the prior year. See pages 56 
and 57 for additional information on free cash flow. The company 
returned $18,519 million to shareholders in 2011, with $15,046 million 
in gross share repurchases and $3,473 million in dividends. In 2011, 
the company repurchased approximately 89 million shares and had 
$8.7 billion remaining in share repurchase authorization at year end. 
The company has consistently generated strong cash from opera-
tions and strong free cash flow and this permits the company to 
invest and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive long-term 
opportunities.


===== PAGE 55 =====
54
54
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled 
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale 
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2011:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$50,138 
$ 341 
$      2
$50,481 
Gross profit margin
46.9%
0.3 pts.
0.0 pts.
47.2%
SG&A
$23,594 
$(309)
$   (13)
$23,272 
RD&E
6,258
0
88
6,345
Other (income) and expense
(20)
(25)
0
(45)
Total expense and other (income)
29,135
(334)
74
28,875
Pre-tax income 
21,003
675
(72)
21,605
Pre-tax income margin
19.6%
0.6 pts.
(0.1) pts.
20.2%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,148
$ 179 
$   (40)
$  5,287 
Effective tax rate
24.5%
0.1 pts.
(0.1) pts.
24.5%
Net income
$15,855 
$ 495 
$   (32)
$16,318 
Net income margin
14.8%
0.5 pts.
(0.0) pts.
15.3%
Diluted earnings per share
$  13.06
$0.41 
$(0.03)
$  13.44 
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2010:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$46,014 
$ 260 
$ (204)
$46,070 
Gross profit margin
46.1%
0.3 pts.
(0.2) pts.
46.1%
SG&A
$21,837 
$(294)
$    84 
$21,628 
RD&E
6,026
0
126
6,152
Other (income) and expense
(787)
(4)
0
(791)
Total expense and other (income)
26,291
(298)
210
26,202
Pre-tax income 
19,723
558
(414)
19,867
Pre-tax income margin
19.7%
0.6 pts.
(0.4) pts.
19.9%
Provision for income taxes*
$  4,890 
$ 116 
$ (162)
$  4,844 
Effective tax rate
24.8%
(0.1)pts.
(0.3) pts.
24.4%
Net income
$14,833 
$ 443 
$ (253)
$15,023 
Net income margin
14.9%
0.4 pts.
(0.3) pts.
15.0%
Diluted earnings per share
$  11.52 
$0.34 
$(0.20)
$  11.67 
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 56 =====
55
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Information
Looking Forward
In 2012, the company delivered revenue of $104.5 billion, net income 
of $16.6 billion, up 4.7 percent and earnings per share of $14.37, an 
increase of 10.0 percent compared to 2011. Operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share was $15.25, an increase of 13.5 percent versus 
the prior year. The 2012 results put the company well on track to its 
2015 operating earnings per share road map objective. 
	
The company measures the success of its business model over 
the long term, not any individual quarter or year. The company’s 
strategies, investments and actions are all taken with an objective 
of optimizing long-term performance.
	
In May 2010, the company met with investors and introduced 
a road map for earnings per share in 2015. The objective of the 
road map for growth is to achieve at least $20 of operating (non-
GAAP) earnings per diluted share in 2015. The company has 
identified the major drivers of financial performance: revenue 
growth, margin expansion and common stock share repurchase. 
The revenue growth will come from a combination of base revenue 
growth, a shift to faster growing businesses and from acquisitions 
closed between 2010 and 2015. The contribution from margin 
expansion will be driven by the mix of higher margin businesses 
and enterprise productivity. The company will also continue to 
return value to its shareholders, with approximately $50 billion of 
gross share repurchases and $20 billion of dividends expected 
during the road map period. 
	
Looking forward, the company expects to continue its trans­
formation in 2013. The company will continue to acquire key 
capabilities, divest of certain businesses, rebalance its workforce 
and invest in innovation. The company continues to retool its skills 
and offerings to shift to higher value content and meet its clients’ 
needs. The company’s expectation for 2013 includes all these fac-
tors. In January 2013, the company disclosed that it is expecting 
GAAP earnings of at least $15.53 and operating (non-GAAP) earn-
ings of at least $16.70 per diluted share for the full year 2013. The 
operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share expectation excludes 
acquisition-related charges of $0.48 per share and non-operating 
retirement-related costs of $0.69 per share. This expectation results 
in an increase year to year of 8 percent in GAAP earnings per share 
and an increase of 10 percent year to year in operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share which keeps the company on track to its 2015 
objective. On an operating (non-GAAP) basis, the company expects 
the first half earnings per share growth rate to be slightly higher 
than the growth rate in the second half primarily driven by the new 
System z mainframe content and the resulting year-to-year product 
cycle impacts. 
	
From a segment perspective, the Software business once again 
delivered strong results in 2012 and continued market leadership. 
The company expects the Software business to continue its momen-
tum in 2013 and deliver revenue growth in the mid single-digits on a 
constant currency basis with strong profit contribution. Within Global 
Services, entering 2013, the company will continue to drive its key 
plays and shift toward higher value content. The company will 
continue to invest in the growth markets—which represent over 20 
percent of services revenue and where the company sees the most 
opportunity for growth. The company will continue to transform the 
services portfolio to higher value content, and away from the more 
commoditizing labor-based content. Global Services profit and 
margin performance will continue to benefit from the work being 
done to infuse more IP content into its offerings. In addition, Global 
Services will continue to be the prime beneficiary of the focus on 
enterprise productivity. The company believes that Global Services 
has a good set of opportunities to continue to drive profit growth and 
margin expansion in 2013. As a result, the company expects the 
Global Services business to deliver profit growth in 2013, consistent 
with its business model expectations, with double-digit profit growth 
in the first quarter. In addition, with its backlog growth and the mix 
toward longer duration engagements, the company expects Global 
Business Services to return to revenue growth at constant currency 
in 2013. Within Systems and Technology, looking forward to 2013, 
performance in the first half of the year will be defined by the momen-
tum related to the System z mainframe content. The company 
expects that momentum to drive double-digit profit growth in Sys-
tems and Technology in the first half of 2013.
	
The economy could impact the credit quality of the company’s 
receivables, and therefore the allowance for credit losses. The com-
pany will continue to apply its rigorous credit policies and analysis, 
and will also continue to monitor the current economic environment, 
particularly in Europe. Total receivables in Portugal, Italy, Ireland, 
Greece and Spain were approximately $2.7 billion and $2.6 billion, net 
of allowances, and represented approximately 7 percent of total net 
trade and financing accounts receivables at December 31, 2012 and 
2011, respectively. The company will continue to monitor potential 
exposures in these countries in conjunction with the application of its 
credit policies. 
	
The company expects 2013 pre-tax retirement-related plan 
cost to be approximately $3.1 billion, an increase of approximately 
$700 million compared to 2012. This estimate reflects current 
pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2012. Within total 
retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan cost 
is expected to be approximately $1.9 billion, an increase of approxi-
mately $100 million versus 2012. Non-operating retirement-related 
plan cost is expected to be approximately $1.1 billion, an increase 
of approximately $600 million, compared to 2012. See note S, 
“Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional 
information.
	
The company expects in the normal course of business that 
its effective tax rate and operating (non-GAAP) tax rate will be 
approximately 25 percent in 2013. The rate will change year to year 
based on non-recurring events, such as the settlement of income 
tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors 
including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the timing 
and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local taxes 
and the effects of various global income tax strategies.


===== PAGE 57 =====
56
56
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from 
operations, providing a source of funds ranging between $18.8 billion 
and $20.8 billion per year over the past five years. The company 
provides for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining 
an adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources, a 
committed global credit facility and other committed and uncommit-
ted lines of credit worldwide. The following table provides a summary 
of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, 
2008 through 2012.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
($ in billions)
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
Net cash from  
operating activities
$19.6 
$19.8 
$19.5 
$20.8 
$18.8 
Cash and short-term  
marketable securities
$11.1 
$11.9 
$11.7 
$14.0 
$12.9 
Committed global  
credit facility
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securities 
at December 31, 2012 appear in the following table. The Standard 
and Poor’s ratings reflect an upgrade on May 30, 2012. The other 
agency ratings remain unchanged from December 31, 2011. The 
company’s debt securities do not contain any acceleration clauses 
which could change the scheduled maturities of the obligation. In 
addition, the company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in 
its debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders 
to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate payments 
thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. The company’s 
contractual agreements governing derivative instruments contain 
standard market clauses which can trigger the termination of the 
agreement if the company’s credit rating were to fall below investment 
grade. At December 31, 2012, the fair value of those instruments that 
were in a liability position was $503 million, before any applicable 
netting, and this position is subject to fluctuations in fair value period 
to period based on the level of the company’s outstanding instru-
ments and market conditions. The company has no other contractual 
arrangements that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would 
result in a material adverse effect on its financial position or liquidity.
Standard 
& Poor’s
Moody’s 
Investors 
Service
Fitch 
Ratings
Senior long-term debt
AA-
Aa3
A+
Commercial paper
A-1+
Prime-1
F1
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow 
presentation on page 73 and highlights causes and events under-
lying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 36. For the 
purpose of running its business, the company manages, monitors 
and analyzes cash flows in a different format.
	
Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the 
company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evaluate 
strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and need 
to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term under 
GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow 
amount is available for discretionary expenditures. The company 
defines free cash flow as net cash from operating activities less the 
change in Global Financing receivables and net capital expenditures, 
including the investment in software. As discussed on page 24, a 
key objective of the Global Financing business is to generate strong 
returns on equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a 
financing business. Accordingly, management considers Global 
Financing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as work-
ing capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering 
Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net 
operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by the 
company as free cash flow.
	
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP was $19.6 billion in 
2012, a decrease of $0.3 billion from the prior year. As discussed on 
page 36, a key driver was a decrease in cash provided by receiv-
ables, primarily Global Financing receivables, which increased $3.2 
billion year to year. The increase in Global Financing receivables 
resulted from an increase in originations primarily driven by an 
improved participation rate. From the perspective of how manage-
ment views cash flow, in 2012, free cash flow was $18.2 billion, an 
increase of $1.6 billion compared to 2011. The increase was primarily 
driven by the increase in net income and a reduction in income tax 
payments as a result of audit settlements in 2011. Within its strong 
free cash flow performance, the company increased its capital 
expenditures by $0.2 billion versus the prior year.
	
In 2012, the company continued to focus its cash utilization on 
returning value to shareholders including $3.8 billion in dividends 
and $10.5 billion in net stock transactions, including the common 
stock repurchase program. In addition, $3.7 billion was utilized to 
acquire 11 companies. For the full year, the company generated $18.2 
billion in free cash flow and utilized $18.0 billion on acquisitions, net 
share repurchases and dividends.
	
Over the past five years, the company generated over $80 billion 
in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested nearly 
$19 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $61 billion to 
shareholders through dividends and net share repurchases. The 
amount of prospective returns to shareholders in the form of divi-
dends and share repurchases will vary based upon several factors 
including each year’s operating results, capital expenditure require-
ments, research and development investments and acquisitions, as 
well as the factors discussed on page 57.
	
The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider 
the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2012, the Board 
of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock 
dividend from $0.75 to $0.85 per share.


===== PAGE 58 =====
57
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described on page 56.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP
$ 19.6
$ 19.8 
$ 19.5
$20.8
$ 18.8 
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables
(2.9)
(0.8)
(0.7)
1.9
(0.0)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding Global Financing receivables
22.5
20.7
20.3
18.9
18.8
Capital expenditures, net
(4.3)
(4.1)
(4.0)
(3.7)
(4.5)
Free cash flow 
18.2
16.6
16.3
15.1
14.3
Acquisitions
(3.7)
(1.8)
(5.9)
(1.2)
(6.3)
Divestitures
0.6
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.1
Share repurchase
(12.0)
(15.0)
(15.4)
(7.4)
(10.6)
Dividends
(3.8)
(3.5)
(3.2)
(2.9)
(2.6)
Non-Global Financing debt
0.7
1.7
2.3
(4.7)
(3.2)
Other (includes Global Financing receivables and Global Financing debt) 
(0.8)
2.3
3.5
1.7
5.0
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities
$  (0.8)
$   0.3
$  (2.3)
$  1.1
$   (3.2)
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow 
dynamics discussed above include significant changes in operating 
results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, unexpected 
adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding requirements 
during periods of severe downturn in the capital markets or the 
timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such an adverse 
impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more com-
pletely described in note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on 
pages 110 through 112. With respect to pension funding, in 2012, the 
company contributed $617 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit 
plans versus $798 million in 2011. As highlighted in the Contractual 
Obligations table on page 58, the company expects to make legally 
mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. plans of 
approximately $4.0 billion in the next five years. The 2013 contribu-
tions are currently expected to be approximately $700 million. 
Financial market performance and/or further weakening in the Euro-
pean sovereign debt credit environment in 2013 could increase the 
legally mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. coun-
tries that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. 
The company is not quantifying any further impact from pension 
funding because it is not possible to predict future movements in 
the capital markets or pension plan funding regulations.
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in 
2006, and, among other things, increases the funding requirements 
for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after December 31, 
2007. No mandatory contribution is required for the U.S. defined 
benefit plan in 2013 as of December 31, 2012.
	
The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund 
its current domestic operations and obligations, including investing 
and financing activities such as dividends and debt service. The 
company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows, and, 
in those circumstances where the company has additional cash 
requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity options 
available. These options may include the ability to borrow additional 
funds at reasonable interest rates, utilizing its committed global 
credit facility, repatriating certain foreign earnings and utilizing inter-
company loans with certain foreign subsidiaries. 
	
The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax 
income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely rein-
vest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and 
accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made 
on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company 
periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that 
it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the 
deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested 
earnings is not practicable. While the company currently does not 
have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign subsidiaries, if 
these funds are needed for operations and obligations in the U.S., the 
company could elect to repatriate these funds which could result in 
a reassessment of the company’s policy and increased tax expense.


===== PAGE 59 =====
58
58
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual 
Payment Stream
Payments Due In
2013
2014-15
2016-17
After 2017
Long-term debt obligations
$29,599
$  5,548
$  6,444
$  7,570
$10,037
Interest on long-term debt obligations
9,842
1,014
1,617
1,410
5,800
Capital (finance) lease obligations
61
13
24
19
6
Operating lease obligations
5,806
1,466
2,312
1,281
747
Purchase obligations
1,383
559
618
139
68
Other long-term liabilities
Minimum pension funding (mandated)*
4,000
700
1,600
1,700
—
Executive compensation
1,595
94
206
229
1,066
Long-term termination benefits
1,283
221
174
126
763
Tax reserves**
3,942
1,724
—
—
—
Other
1,107
60
91
81
876
Total
$58,619
$11,398
$13,086
$12,554
$19,363
  * As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2017 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $1,724 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the 
next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the 
progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months. 
Total contractual obligations are reported in the table above excluding 
the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal the amounts 
reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
	
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase 
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet 
any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the com-
pany would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or 
(3) the company must make specified minimum payments even if 
it does not take delivery of the contracted products or services 
(take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or services is non-
cancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in the table 
above. If the obligation is cancelable, but the company would incur 
a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included 
as a purchase obligation. Contracted minimum amounts specified 
in take-or-pay contracts are also included in the table as they rep-
resent the portion of each contract that is a firm commitment.
	
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into con-
tracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a portion of 
its requirements of a specific product, commodity or service from 
a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in 
order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. They do not 
specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore, 
the company does not consider them to be purchase obligations.
	
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the 
effective interest rate at December 31, 2012, plus the interest rate 
spread associated with that debt, if any. 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet 
arrangements as defined by the SEC Financial Reporting Release 
67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con­tractual 
Obligations.”
	
At December 31, 2012, the company had no off-balance sheet 
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material 
current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial 
condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capi-
tal expenditures or capital resources. See the table above for the 
company’s contractual obligations, and note M, “Contingencies and 
Commitments,” on page 113, for detailed information about the com-
pany’s guarantees, financial commitments and indemnification 
arrangements. The company does not have retained interests in 
assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other material off-
balance sheet interests or instruments.


===== PAGE 60 =====
59
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires the company to make estimates 
and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly 
affect its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and 
assumptions discussed in this section are those that the company 
considers to be the most critical to its financial statements. An 
accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of 
the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of subjectiv-
ity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable 
range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to the 
company’s financial condition. Senior management has discussed 
the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with 
the Audit Committee of the company’s Board of Directors. The 
company’s significant accounting policies are described in note A, 
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 86.
	
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that informa-
tion is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides 
material information to investors. The amounts used to assess sen-
sitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow users 
of the Annual Report to understand a general direction cause and 
effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent manage-
ment’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should 
be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, 
and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
Pension Assumptions
For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measurement 
of the company’s benefit obligation to employees and net periodic 
pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain assumptions, 
including, among others, estimates of discount rates and expected 
return on plan assets.
	
Changes in the discount rate assumptions will impact the (gain)/
loss amortization and interest cost components of the net periodic 
pension (income)/cost calculation (see page 126 for information 
regarding the discount rate assumptions) and the projected benefit 
obligation (PBO). The company decreased the discount rate 
assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based 
defined benefit plan, by 60 basis points to 3.60 percent on Decem-
ber 31, 2012. This change will increase pre-tax cost and expense 
recognized in 2013 by an estimated $156 million. If the discount rate 
assumption for the PPP increased by 60 basis points on December 
31, 2012, pre-tax cost and expense recognized in 2013 would have 
decreased by an estimated $200 million. Changes in the discount 
rate assumptions will impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact the 
company’s funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. Each 
25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate will cause 
a corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the PPP’s 
PBO of an estimated $1.4 billion based upon December 31, 2012 data. 
	
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is 
used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost (see page 
126 for information regarding the expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption). Expected returns on plan assets are calculated 
based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes 
changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-
year period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic 
pension (income)/cost. The differences between the actual return 
on plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets 
are recognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets 
line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component 
of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized over the service lives 
of the employees in the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresh-
olds which are based upon the obligation or the value of plan assets, 
as provided by accounting standards.
	
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such 
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in the 
expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption will have 
an estimated increase or decrease, respectively, of $249 million on 
the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension (income)/cost 
(based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, 2012 and 
assuming no contributions are made in 2013).
	
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required, 
by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual results that 
differ from the estimates may result in more or less future company 
funding into the pension plans than is planned by management. 
Impacts of these types of changes on the company’s pension plans 
in other countries worldwide will vary depending upon the status of 
each respective plan.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related to 
the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the company 
to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrange-
ments with nonstandard terms and conditions may require 
significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate 
accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple 
element arrangement should be treated as separate units of 
accounting. Other significant judgments include determining whether 
IBM or a reseller is acting as the principal in a transaction and 
whether separate contracts are considered part of one arrangement.
	
Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability 
to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. The 
company considers various factors, including a review of specific 
transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, historical experi-
ence and market and economic conditions when calculating these 
provisions and allowances. Evaluations are conducted each quarter 
to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates were 
changed by 10 percent in 2012, net income would have been 
impacted by $79 million (excluding Global Financing receivables 
discussed on page 65).


===== PAGE 61 =====
60
60
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
The company enters into numerous service contracts through its 
Global Services business. During the contractual period, revenue, 
cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profit-
ability of each contract, especially contracts for which the company 
uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method of accounting. If 
at any time these estimates indicate the POC contract will be unprof-
itable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is 
recorded immediately in cost. The company performs ongoing 
profitability analyses of its services contracts in order to deter-
mine whether the latest estimates require updating. Key factors 
reviewed by the company to estimate the future costs to complete 
each contract are future labor costs, future product costs and 
expected productivity efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded 
as a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities were 
approximately $54 million and $52 million at December 31, 2012 and 
2011, respectively.
Income Taxes
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous 
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determin-
ing the consolidated provision for income taxes.
	
During the ordinary course of business, there are many trans-
actions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is 
uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based 
on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. 
These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s 
belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company 
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon 
review by tax authorities. The company believes that its accruals for 
tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on its 
assessment of many factors, including past experience and inter-
pretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates and 
assumptions, and may involve a series of complex judgments 
about future events. To the extent that new information becomes 
available which causes the company to change its judgment 
regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to 
tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which 
such determination is made.
	
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation 
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the 
need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available 
evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, esti-
mates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax 
planning strategies. In the event that the company changes its deter-
mination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be 
realized, the company will adjust its valuation allowance with a cor-
responding impact to income tax expense in the period in which 
such determination is made.
	
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period 
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of 
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring 
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the 
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local 
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies.
	
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/
decreases by 1 percent of income before income taxes, consolidated 
net income would have decreased/improved by $219 million in 2012.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment accounting 
requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The acqui-
sition method of accounting for business combinations requires the 
company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities 
assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree to properly 
allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are 
depreciated and amortized from goodwill and indefinite-lived intan-
gible assets. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill and 
indefinite-lived intangible assets, requires the allocation of cash flows 
to those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair 
value for the assets or group of assets. The company’s estimates 
are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which 
are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require 
the use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect 
unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
Valuation of Goodwill
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually, in the 
fourth quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances 
indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. 
	
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its reporting 
units that carry goodwill. Among other relevant events and circum-
stances that affect the fair value of reporting units, the company 
assesses individual factors such as: 
•	
A significant adverse change in legal factors  
or the business climate;
•	
An adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
•	
Unanticipated competition;
•	
A loss of key personnel; and
•	
A more likely than not expectation that a reporting  
unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be  
sold or otherwise disposed of.
The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine 
whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill 
impairment test. This quantitative test is required only if the com-
pany concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s 
fair value is less than its carrying amount. After performing the 
annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis during the fourth 
quarter of 2012, the company determined it was not necessary to 
perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.
Loss Contingencies
The company is currently involved in various claims and legal 
proceedings. Quarterly, the company reviews the status of each 
significant matter and assesses its potential financial exposure. If 
the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered 
probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, the com-
pany accrues a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment 
is required in both the determination of probability and the determi-
nation as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because 


===== PAGE 62 =====
61
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only 
on the best information available at the time. As additional informa-
tion becomes available, the company reassesses the potential 
liability related to its pending claims and litigation, and may revise its 
estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities 
could have a material impact on the company’s results of operations 
and financial position. 
Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses 
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables 
port­folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A 
description of the methods used by management to estimate the 
amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Significant 
Accounting Policies,” on page 85. Factors that could result in actual 
receivable losses that are materially different from the estim­ated 
reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant 
change in the economic health of a particular client that represents 
a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.
	
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from manage-
ment’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global 
Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s consoli-
dated income before income taxes would be higher or lower by an 
estimated $36 million (using 2012 data), depending upon whether 
the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the 
estimates.
Residual Value 
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment 
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates 
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as operat-
ing or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of 
leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current 
market for new and used equipment, and obtaining forward-looking 
product information such as marketing plans and technological 
innovations. Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed and 
“other than temporary” declines in estimated future residual values 
are recognized upon identification. Anticipated increases in future 
residual values are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. 
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from the 
estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment market 
brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations and 
any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment.
	
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than 
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s segment 
pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income before 
income taxes for 2012 would have been lower by an estimated 
$105 million. If the actual residual value recovery is higher than 
management’s estimates, the increase in income will be realized at 
the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed.
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. 
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position. 
At December 31, 2012, currency changes resulted in assets and 
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into fewer 
dollars than at year-end 2011. The company uses financial hedging 
instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing trans-
actions and other foreign currency-based transactions. Further 
discussion of currency and hedging appears in note D, “Financial 
Instruments,” on pages 94 to 98. 
	
Foreign currency fluctuations often drive operational responses 
that mitigate the simple mechanical translation of earnings. During 
periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and 
competition adjust to the changing rates. For example, when pricing 
offerings in the marketplace, the company may use some of the 
advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve its position com-
petitively, and price more aggressively to win the business, 
essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage to 
its customers. Competition will frequently take the same action. 
Consequently, the company believes that some of the currency-
based changes in cost impact the prices charged to clients. The 
company also maintains currency hedging programs for cash man-
agement purposes which mitigate, but do not eliminate, the volatility 
of currency impacts on the company’s financial results. 
	
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. 
References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect 
adjustments based upon a simple constant currency mathematical 
translation of local currency results using the comparable prior 
period’s currency conversion rate. However, this constant currency 
methodology that the company utilizes to disclose this information 
does not incorporate any operational actions that management may 
take in reaction to fluctuating currency rates. Based on the currency 
rate movements in 2012, total revenue decreased 2.3 percent as 
reported and was flat at constant currency versus 2011. On a pre-tax 
income basis, these translation impacts offset by the net impact of 
hedging activities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no 
pricing or sourcing actions) decrease of approximately $100 million 
in 2012. The same mathematical exercise resulted in an increase of 
approximately $600 million in 2011. The company views these 
amounts as a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported finan-
cial results. Considering the operational responses mentioned 
above, movements of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of 
hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts 
on any particular period, but the company believes it could be sub-
stantially less than the theoretical maximum given the competitive 
pressure in the marketplace.
	
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. dol-
lars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, translation 
adjustments are reflected in results of operations. Generally, the 
company manages currency risk in these entities by linking prices 
and contracts to U.S. dollars. The company continues to monitor 
the economic conditions in Venezuela. On December 30, 2010, the 
official rate for essential goods was eliminated, with no change to 
the SITME rate. The SITME rate remained constant throughout 2012 
and 2011. In February 2013, the SITME rate was eliminated, and the 
official rate was set at 6.3 bolivars fuerte (BsF) to the U.S. dollar. This 
devaluation is not expected to have a material impact given the size 
of the company’s operations in Venezuela (less than 1 percent of 
total 2011 and 2012 revenue, respectively).


===== PAGE 63 =====
62
62
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the 
company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the 
market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements 
on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and 
liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts 
receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets.
	
The company regularly assesses these risks and has established 
policies and business practices to protect against the adverse 
effects of these and other potential exposures. As a result, the com-
pany does not anticipate any material losses from these risks.
	
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business 
and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, contains 
an element of market risk from changes in interest and currency 
rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through the use of a 
variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as described 
in note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 94 to 98.
	
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a sen-
sitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk exposures 
may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other finan-
cial instruments.
	
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity 
analysis comprise all of the company’s cash and cash equivalents, 
marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial 
financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long-
term and short-term debt and all derivative financial instruments. 
The company’s derivative financial instruments generally include 
interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and forward contracts.
	
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the 
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in 
interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-sen-
sitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign 
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present value 
of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that 
are attributable to the market risk being measured. The discount 
rates used for the present value computations were selected 
based on market interest and foreign currency exchange rates in 
effect at December 31, 2012 and 2011. The differences in this com-
parison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated with each 
type of risk.
	
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not neces-
sarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the company 
would incur under normal market conditions because, due to practi-
cal limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk factor 
are held constant. In addition, the results of the model are con-
strained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded from 
the analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the financing 
or hedging of those items are included by definition. Excluded items 
include short-term and long-term receivables from sales-type and 
direct financing leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and 
the company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a conse-
quence, reported changes in the values of some of the financial 
instruments impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not 
matched with the offsetting changes in the values of the items that 
those instruments are designed to finance or hedge.
	
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2012 and 
2011, are as follows: 
Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2012, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of interest 
rates with all other variables held constant would result in a decrease 
in the fair market value of the company’s financial instruments of 
$192 million as compared with a decrease of $310 million at Decem-
ber 31, 2011. A 10 percent increase in the levels of interest rates with 
all other variables held constant would result in an increase in the 
fair value of the company’s financial instruments of $181 million as 
compared to an increase of $290 million at December 31, 2011. 
Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s 
financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the 
level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in the com-
pany’s debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount. 
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
At December 31, 2012, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against for-
eign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result 
in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments 
of $1,203 million as compared with an increase of $1,303 million at 
December 31, 2011. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger U.S. dollar 
against foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, 
would result in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial 
instruments of $1,203 million compared with a decrease of $1,303 
million at December 31, 2011. The change in impact from 2011 to 
2012 was comprised of: assets ($84 million), debt ($216 million) and 
derivatives ($202 million). 
Financing Risks
See the “Description of Business” on page 24 for a discussion of 
the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business 
and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
Cybersecurity
While neither a business unit nor a worldwide organization, the com-
pany’s approach on cybersecurity demonstrates its ability to adapt 
to a changing environment, as well as the depth and breadth of its 
global capabilities. IBM has leveraged its extensive knowledge and 
experience on cybersecurity matters to help its customers. The 
company has a suite of software solutions that showcase IBM’s 
broad capabilities in identity and access management, data security, 
application security, network security and endpoint security. IBM’s 
software solutions include a security intelligence dashboard that 
can collect information on customer IT security events and provide 
detailed information to customers about potential threats and secu-
rity posture. The company’s services businesses offer professional 
solutions for security from assessment to deployment. In addition, the 
company offers managed and outsourced security solutions from 
multiple security operations centers around the world. Finally, security 
is embedded in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure engineer-
ing processes and by critical functions (encryption, access control, 
etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions. 


===== PAGE 64 =====
63
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
From an enterprise perspective, IBM has implemented a multi-
faceted approach involving people, tools, and processes to identify 
and address cybersecurity risks. The company has established 
policies and procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s 
infrastructure and data are managed, which help protect IBM and 
client data. In addition, the company utilizes a combination of online 
education, Web articles and other awareness initiatives to enable 
its workforce to be knowledgeable about cybersecurity threats and 
their responsibilities to identify and mitigate these risks. IBM per-
forms ongoing assessments regarding its technical controls and its 
methods for identifying emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The 
company uses a layered approach with overlapping controls to defend 
against cybersecurity attacks on networks, end-user devices, data 
centers, and applications.
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2012-11
2011-10
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries
434,246
433,362
426,751
0.2%
1.5%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries
8,009
7,523
9,334
6.5
(19.4)
Complementary
24,740
25,500
27,784
(3.0)
(8.2)
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in over 
170 countries and is continuing to shift its business to the higher 
value segments of enterprise computing. The company continually 
assesses its resource needs with the objective of balancing its 
workforce globally to improve the company’s global reach and 
competitiveness. 
	
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent 
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and limited- 
term employment arrangements to meet specific business needs 
in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
Global Financing 
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a 
stand-alone entity. 
 	
In 2012, as the global economy continued to face a challenging 
credit environment, the Global Financing business remained focused 
on its core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s 
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing deliv-
ered external revenue of $2,013 million and total revenue of $4,073 
million, and expanded gross and pre-tax margins. Total pre-tax 
income of $2,034 million increased 1.1 percent compared to 2011 and 
return on equity was 41.0 percent.
	
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact 
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results 
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact 
Global Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both financing 
revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Originations, which 
determine the asset base of Global Financing’s annuity-like busi-
ness, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing sales and services 
volumes and Global Financing’s participation rates. Participation 
rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to finance their transactions 
through Global Financing in lieu of paying IBM up-front cash or 
financing through a third party. 
Results of Operations
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
External revenue
$2,013
$2,102 
$2,238 
Internal revenue
2,060
2,092
1,842
Total revenue
4,073
4,195
4,080
Cost
1,400
1,467
1,474
Gross profit
$2,673
$2,728 
$2,606 
Gross profit margin
65.6%
65.0%
63.9%
Pre-tax income
$2,034
$2,011 
$1,956 
After-tax income*
$1,362
$1,338 
$1,292 
Return on equity*
41.0%
40.7%
41.1%
* See page 67 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation. 
Total revenue in 2012 decreased $122 million versus 2011 as a result of:
•	
A decline in external revenue of 4.2 percent (1 percent  
adjusted for currency) driven by a decrease in financing  
revenue (down 8.7 percent to $1,471 million), partially  
offset by an increase in used equipment sales revenue  
(up 10.6 percent to $540 million); and 
•	
A decline in internal revenue of 1.6 percent driven by  
a decrease in financing revenue (down 11.3 percent to  
$500 million), partially offset by an increase in used  
equipment sales revenue (up 2.0 percent to $1,559 million).
The decreases in external and internal financing revenue were due 
to lower asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue.
Global Financing gross profit decreased 2.0 percent compared to 
2011 due to a decrease in financing gross profit, partially offset by 
an increase in used equipment sales gross profit. The gross profit 
margin increased 0.6 points due to a higher financing margin, par-
tially offset by a shift in mix toward lower margin used equipment 
sales and a lower used equipment sales margin. 


===== PAGE 65 =====
64
64
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2011 increased $115 million versus 2010 as a result of:
•	
An increase in internal revenue of 13.6 percent primarily  
driven by an increase in used equipment sales revenue  
(up 19.7 percent to $1,528 million); partially offset by
•	
A decline in external revenue of 6.1 percent (9 percent  
adjusted for currency) driven by a decrease in used equipment 
sales revenue (down 25.5 percent to $490 million), partially 
offset by an increase in financing revenue (up 2.0 percent to 
$1,612 million).
The increase in external financing revenue was due to a higher aver-
age asset balance and an increase in remarketing lease revenue.
	
Global Financing gross profit in 2011 increased 4.7 percent com-
pared to 2010 due to higher used equipment sales and financing 
gross profit. The gross profit margin increased 1.2 points primarily 
due to a higher used equipment sales margin.
	
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 1.1 percent in 2012 
versus 2011, following an increase of 2.8 percent in 2011 versus 2010. 
The increase in 2012 was driven by decreases in SG&A expense 
($61 million) and financing receivables provisions ($16 million), 
partially offset by the decrease in gross profit ($55 million). The 
increase in 2011 was driven by the increase in gross profit ($122 
million), partially offset by increases in financing receivables provi-
sions ($51 million) and SG&A expense ($13 million). The increase in 
financing receivables provisions in 2011 was due primarily to the 
economic environment in Europe. At December 31, 2012, the overall 
allowance for credit losses coverage rate was 1.2 percent, a decrease 
of 0.1 points versus 2011.
	
The increase in return on equity from 2011 to 2012 was driven by 
higher after-tax income, and the decrease in return on equity from 
2010 to 2011 was driven by a higher average equity balance.
Financial Condition
Balance Sheet
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Cash and cash equivalents
$  1,380
$  1,308
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
10,008
9,209
Equipment under operating leases
External clients (a)
1,273
1,567
Internal clients (b)(c)
25
219
Client loans
13,121
11,363
Total client financing assets
24,428
22,358
Commercial financing receivables
7,755
7,130
Intercompany financing receivables (b)(c)
4,328
4,586
Other receivables
459
334
Other assets
533
712
Total assets
$38,882
$36,427 
Intercompany payables (b)
$  6,802
$  6,213
Debt (d)
24,501
23,332
Other liabilities
4,084
3,633
Total liabilities
35,388
33,178
Total equity
3,494
3,249
Total liabilities and equity
$38,882
$36,427 
(a)	Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products 
purchased from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s 
consolidated results. 
(b)	Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore 
does not appear on page 72.
(c)	These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the 
value in the table using Global Financing debt. ­
(d)	Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt. A 
portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business, or 
related to intercompany mark-up embedded in the Global Financing assets. See 
table on page 67. ­
Sources and Uses of Funds 
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client 
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end 
users consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services, but 
also include non-IBM equipment, software and services to meet 
IBM clients’ total solutions requirements. Client financing assets are 
primarily sales-type, direct financing and operating leases for sys-
tems products as well as loans for systems, software and services 
with terms generally from one to seven years. Global Financing’s 
client loans are primarily for software and services and are unsecured. 
These loans are subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associ-
ated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate 
risks in the loan agreements which include covenants to protect 
against credit deterioration during the life of the obligation. Client 
financing also includes internal activity as described on page 24.


===== PAGE 66 =====
65
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory 
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of 
IBM and non-IBM products. Payment terms for inventory financing 
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 
days. These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and are 
also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate the 
associated risk.
	
In addition to the actions described above, in certain circum-
stances, the company may take mitigation actions to transfer credit 
risk to third parties.
	
At December 31, 2012, substantially all financing assets were IT 
related assets, and approximately 60 percent of the external port-
folio was with investment grade clients with no direct exposure to 
consumers or mortgage assets. 
Originations 
The following are total financing originations.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Client financing
$16,277
$14,390
$12,748
Commercial financing
36,944
35,282
32,366
Total
$53,222
$49,673 
$45,113 
In 2012, new financing originations exceeded cash collections for 
both client and commercial financing. This resulted in a net increase 
in total financing assets from December 31, 2011. The increase in 
originations in both 2012 versus 2011 and 2011 versus 2010 was due 
to improving external volumes in both client and commercial financ-
ing. Internal loan financing with Global Services is executed under 
a loan facility and is not considered originations.
	
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2012 was primarily 
deployed to pay the intercompany payables and dividends to IBM.
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
The following table presents external financing receivables excluding 
residual values, and the allowance for credit losses.
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Gross financing receivables
$30,621
$27,366 
Specific allowance for credit losses
240
226
Unallocated allowance for credit losses
115
124
Total allowance for credit losses
355
350
Net financing receivables
$30,266
$27,016 
Allowance for credit losses coverage
1.2%
1.3%
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables 
Allowance for Credit Losses
($ in millions)
January 1, 2012
Allowance 
Used*
Additions/ 
(Reductions)
Other**
December 31, 
2012
$350
$(19 )
$26 
$(1 )
$355 
  * Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were disposed of during 
the period. 
** Primarily represents translation adjustments. 
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved 
decreased from 1.3 percent at December 31, 2011 to 1.2 percent 
at December 31, 2012 primarily due to the disposition of receiv-
ables previously reserved, and the increase in gross financing 
receivables. Specific reserves increased 6.2 percent from $226 
million at December 31, 2011 to $240 million at December 31, 2012. 
Unallocated reserves decreased 7.3 percent from $124 million at 
December 31, 2011, to $115 million at December 31, 2012. Global 
Financing’s bad debt expense was an increase of $26 million for 
2012, compared to an increase of $42 million for 2011. The higher 
bad debt expense in 2011 was attributed to the economic environ-
ment in Europe.
Residual Value 
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and man-
agement of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accurately 
project future equipment values at lease inception. Global Financing 
has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM products under 
lease. Based upon this product information, Global Financing con-
tinually monitors projections of future equipment values and 
compares them with the residual values reflected in the portfolio. 
See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 86 for the 
company’s accounting policy for residual values.
	
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by 
selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment 
to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current clients. 
Sales of equipment, which are primarily sourced from equipment 
returned at the end of a lease, represented 51.6 percent of Global 
Financing’s revenue in 2012 and 48.1 percent in 2011. The gross profit 
margins on these sales were 53.6 percent and 54.8 percent in 2012 
and 2011, respectively. The decrease in gross margin was driven by 
a lower internal sales margin and a shift in mix toward lower margin 
external sales, partially offset by a higher external sales margin.


===== PAGE 67 =====
66
66
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed 
residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating leases 
at December 31, 2011 and 2012. In addition, the table presents the 
residual value as a percentage of the related original amount 
financed and a run out of when the unguaranteed residual value 
assigned to equipment on leases at December 31, 2012 is expected 
to be returned to the company. In addition to the unguaranteed 
residual value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain guar-
antees of the future value of the equipment to be returned at end of 
lease. While primarily focused on IBM products, guarantees are also 
obtained for certain OEM products. These third-party guarantees 
are included in minimum lease payments as provided for by 
accounting standards in the determination of lease classifications 
for the covered equipment and provide protection against risk of 
loss arising from declines in equipment values for these assets. 
	
The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease 
payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a 
lease as a sales-type lease, a direct financing lease or an operating 
lease. The aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees 
for sales-type leases were $776 million and $821 million for the 
financing transactions originated during the years ended December 
31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. In 2012, the residual value guarantee 
program resulted in the company recognizing approximately $601 
million of revenue that would otherwise have been recognized in 
future periods as operating lease revenue. If the company had 
chosen to not participate in a residual value guarantee program in 
2012 and prior years, the 2012 impact would be substantially miti-
gated by the effect of prior year asset values being recognized as 
operating lease revenue in the current year. The aggregate asset 
values associated with the guarantees of direct financing leases 
were $199 million and $44 million for the financing transactions 
originated during the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, 
respectively. The associated aggregate guaranteed future values 
at the scheduled end of lease were $53 million and $43 million for 
the financing transactions originated during the years ended 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The cost of guarantees 
was $5 million and $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 
and 2011, respectively.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total
Estimated Run Out of 2012 Balance
At December 31:
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016 and 
Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases
$     745
$     794
$166
$255
$228
$144
Operating leases
296
259
120
75
48
16
Total unguaranteed residual value
$  1,041
$  1,053
$286
$330
$276
$160
Related original amount financed
$18,635 
$18,744
Percentage
5.6%
5.6%
Debt
At December 31:
2012
2011
Debt-to-equity ratio
7.0x
7.2x
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using a 
debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt used to 
fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercompany loans 
and external debt. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by 
the company to substantially match the term and currency underly-
ing the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing. 
Both assets and debt are presented in the Global Financing Balance 
Sheet on page 64.
	
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by 
other IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures Global 
Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest expense 
relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external client and 
internal business is included in the “Global Financing Results of 
Operations” on pages 63 and 64 and in note T, “Segment Informa-
tion,” on pages 134 to 138.
	
In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings on page 
70, the external debt-related interest expense supporting Global 
Financing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified from 
cost of financing to interest expense.


===== PAGE 68 =====
67
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Global Financing is a segment of the company, and therefore is sup-
ported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access to 
capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was primarily 
deployed to pay intercompany payables and dividends to the com-
pany in order to maintain an appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. 
Return on Equity
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Numerator
Global Financing after-tax income (a)*
$1,362
$1,338
Denominator
Average Global Financing equity (b)**
$3,322
$3,286
Global Financing return on equity (a) /(b)
41.0%
40.7%
  * Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s 
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on a 
consolidated basis. 
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters.
Looking Forward
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and funding 
capacity which enables the company to be well positioned in the 
current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new financing 
volumes are primarily IBM products and services financed to the 
company’s clients and business partners, and substantially all 
financing assets are IT related assets which provide a stable base 
of business for future growth. Global Financing’s offerings are com-
petitive and available to clients as a result of the company’s 
borrowing cost and access to the capital markets. Overall, Global 
Financing’s originations will be dependent upon the demand for IT 
products and services as well as client participation rates.
	
IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper 
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted 
period where IBM could not access the capital markets would likely 
lead to a slowdown in originations. 
	
Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency fluc-
tuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. The 
company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, combined 
with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate gross 
margin erosion due to changes in interest rates. 
	
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global 
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provision 
for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply rigorous 
credit policies in both the origination of new business and the evalu-
ation of the existing portfolio.
	
As discussed on pages 65 and 66, Global Financing has histori-
cally been able to manage residual value risk both through insight 
into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its remarketing 
business.
	
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the 
key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with prod-
uct and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent management 
of the business going forward, even during periods of uncertainty 
with respect to the global economy.
The following table provides additional information on total company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes internal loans and 
leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. The company believes these 
assets should be appropriately leveraged in line with the overall Global Financing business model.
($ in millions)
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2011
Global Financing Segment
$24,501 
$23,332 
Debt to support external clients
$21,583 
$20,051 
Debt to support internal clients
2,919
3,281
Non-Global Financing Segments
8,767
7,987
Debt supporting operations
11,686
11,269
Intercompany activity
(2,919)
(3,281)
Total company debt
$33,269 
$31,320 


===== PAGE 69 =====
68
68
Report of Management 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility  
for Financial Information
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial informa-
tion presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM management. 
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in 
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the 
United States of America, applying certain estimates and judgments 
as required. 
	
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, 
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines 
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive 
systems and control procedures. An important element of the control 
environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system also 
contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken to 
correct deficiencies as they are identified.
	
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we 
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate 
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communication 
channels and foster an environment conducive to the effective func-
tioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company to 
conduct its business affairs in accordance with the highest ethical 
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. 
These guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are distrib-
uted to employees throughout the world, and reemphasized through 
internal programs to assure that they are understood and followed. 
	
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public 
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial 
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over financial 
reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits conducted 
in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (United States). 
	
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed 
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is respon-
sible for recommending to the Board the independent registered 
public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject to 
stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically 
and privately with the independent registered public accounting firm, 
with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM manage-
ment, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure and 
financial reporting matters. 
Management’s Report on Internal Control  
Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining 
adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company. 
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to 
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external 
purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America.
	
The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes 
those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance 
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the 
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; 
(ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded 
as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accor-
dance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United 
States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the com-
pany are being made only in accordance with authorizations of 
management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reason-
able assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of 
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s 
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial 
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections 
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to 
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes 
in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or 
procedures may deteriorate.
	
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of 
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in 
Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). 
Based on this evaluation, management concluded that the com-
pany’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as of 
December 31, 2012.
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 26, 2013
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer,
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
February 26, 2013


===== PAGE 70 =====
69
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of  
Directors of International Business  
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State­
ments appearing on pages 70 through 138 present fairly, in all 
material respects, the financial position of International Business 
Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, 2012 
and 2011 and the results of their operations and their cash flows for 
each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2012 in 
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the 
United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company main-
tained, in all material respects, effective internal control over 
financial reporting as of December 31, 2012, based on criteria 
established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by 
the Committee of Sponsoring Organ­izations of the Treadway Com-
mission (COSO). The Company’s management is responsible for 
these financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control 
over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness 
of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accom-
panying Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial 
Reporting appearing on page 68. Our responsibility is to express 
opinions on these financial statements and on the Company’s inter-
nal control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the 
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). 
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to 
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements 
are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal con-
trol over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. 
Our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test 
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the 
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and 
significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the 
overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control 
over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of inter-
nal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material 
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operat-
ing effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. 
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we 
considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our 
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
	
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process 
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability 
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements 
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial 
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to 
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately 
and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of 
the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions 
are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial state-
ments in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, 
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made 
only in accordance with authorizations of management and direc-
tors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance 
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, 
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a 
material effect on the financial statements.
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial 
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections 
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to 
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes 
in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or 
procedures may deteriorate.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
New York, New York
February 26, 2013


===== PAGE 71 =====
70
70
Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2012
2011
2010
Revenue
Services
$  59,453
$  60,721 
$56,868 
Sales
43,014
44,063
40,736
Financing
2,040
2,132
2,267
Total revenue
104,507
106,916
99,870
Cost
Services
39,166
40,740
38,383
Sales
13,956
14,973
14,374
Financing
1,087
1,065
1,100
Total cost
54,209
56,778
53,857
Gross profit
50,298
50,138
46,014
Expense and other income
Selling, general and administrative
23,553
23,594
21,837
Research, development and engineering
O
6,302
6,258
6,026
Intellectual property and custom development income
(1,074)
(1,108)
(1,154)
Other (income) and expense
(843)
(20)
(787)
Interest expense
D&J
459
411
368
Total expense and other income
28,396
29,135
26,291
Income before income taxes
21,902
21,003
19,723
Provision for income taxes
N
5,298
5,148
4,890
Net income 
$  16,604
$  15,855 
$14,833 
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
P
$    14.37
$     13.06
$  11.52
Basic
P
$    14.53
$     13.25
$  11.69
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,155,449,317 1,213,767,985 1,287,355,388
Basic
1,142,508,521 1,196,951,006 1,268,789,202
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 72 =====
71
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2012
2011
2010
Net income
$16,604
$15,855
$14,833 
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments
L
(44)
(693)
712
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
8
(14)
70
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
(42)
(231)
0
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
20
4
8
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
(14)
(241)
78
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
32
(266)
371
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
(253)
511
203
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
(220)
245
573
Retirement-related benefit plans
L
Prior service costs/(credits)
—
(28)
28
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(7,489)
(5,463)
(2,728)
Curtailments and settlements
(2)
11
10
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(148)
(157)
(183)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,457
1,847
1,249
Total retirement-related benefit plans
(5,182)
(3,790)
(1,624)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
L
(5,460)
(4,479)
(260)
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income
L
1,587
1,339
348
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
L
(3,874)
(3,142)
87
Total comprehensive income
$12,731
$12,713
$14,920 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 73 =====
72
72
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31:
Notes
2012
2011
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$   10,412
$   11,922
Marketable securities
D
717
0
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $255 in 2012 and $256 in 2011)
10,667
11,179
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $288 in 2012 and $311 in 2011)
F
18,038
16,901
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $17 in 2012 and $11 in 2011)
1,873
1,481
Inventories
E
2,287
2,595
Deferred taxes
N
1,415
1,601
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
4,024
5,249
Total current assets
49,433
50,928
Property, plant and equipment
G
40,501
40,124
Less: Accumulated depreciation
G
26,505
26,241
Property, plant and equipment—net
G
13,996
13,883
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $66 in 2012 and $38 in 2011)
F
12,812
10,776
Prepaid pension assets
S
945
2,843
Deferred taxes
N
3,973
3,503
Goodwill
I
29,247
26,213
Intangible assets—net
I
3,787
3,392
Investments and sundry assets
H
5,021
4,895
Total assets
$ 119,213 
$ 116,433 
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes
N
$     4,948
$     3,313
Short-term debt
D&J
9,181
8,463
Accounts payable
7,952
8,517
Compensation and benefits
4,745
5,099
Deferred income
11,952
12,197
Other accrued expenses and liabilities
4,847
4,535
Total current liabilities
43,625
42,123
Long-term debt
D&J
24,088
22,857
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations
S
20,418
18,374
Deferred income
4,491
3,847
Other liabilities
K
7,607
8,996
Total liabilities
100,229
96,197
Contingencies and commitments
M
Equity
L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital
50,110
48,129
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2012—2,197,561,159; 2011—2,182,469,838)
Retained earnings
117,641
104,857
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2012—1,080,193,483; 2011—1,019,287,274)
(123,131)
(110,963)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(25,759)
(21,885)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity
18,860
20,138
Noncontrolling interests
A
124
97
Total equity
18,984
20,236
Total liabilities and equity
$ 119,213 
$ 116,433 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 74 =====
73
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income 
$ 16,604
$ 15,855
$ 14,833
Adjustments to reconcile net income  
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation
3,392
3,589
3,657
Amortization of intangibles
1,284
1,226
1,174
Stock-based compensation
688
697
629
Deferred taxes
797
1,212
1,294
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other
(729)
(342)
(801)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables)
(2,230)
(1,279)
(489)
Retirement related
(1,008)
(1,371)
(1,963)
Inventories
280
(163)
92
Other assets/other liabilities
733
(28)
949
Accounts payable
(224)
451
174
Net cash provided by operating activities
19,586
19,846
19,549
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment
(4,082)
(4,108)
(4,185)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment
410
608
770
Investment in software
(635)
(559)
(569)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments
(4,109)
(1,594)
(6,129)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments
3,142
3,345
7,877
Non-operating finance receivables—net
(608)
(291)
(405)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired
(3,722)
(1,811)
(5,922)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred
599
14
55
Net cash used in investing activities
(9,004)
(4,396)
(8,507)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt
12,242
9,996
8,055
Payments to settle debt
(9,549)
(8,947)
(6,522)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net
(441)
1,321
817
Common stock repurchases
(11,995)
(15,046)
(15,375)
Common stock transactions—other
1,540
2,453
3,774
Cash dividends paid
(3,773)
(3,473)
(3,177)
Net cash used in financing activities
(11,976)
(13,696)
(12,429)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(116)
(493)
(135)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
(1,511)
1,262
(1,522)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
11,922
10,661
12,183
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$ 10,412
$ 11,922
$ 10,661
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received
$   3,169
$   4,168
$   3,238
Interest paid on debt
$   1,009
$      956
$      951
Capital lease obligations
$        10
$        39
$        30
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 75 =====
74
74
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2010
Equity, January 1, 2010
$41,810
$80,900
$(81,243)
$(18,830)
$ 22,637
$118 
$ 22,755
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
14,833
14,833
14,833
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
87
87
87
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 14,920
$ 14,920
Cash dividends declared—common stock
(3,177)
(3,177)
(3,177)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (34,783,386 shares)
3,579
3,579
3,579
Purchases (2,334,932 shares) and  
sales (7,929,318 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(24)
501
477
477
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (117,721,650 shares)
(15,419)
(15,419)
(15,419)
Changes in other equity
28
28
28
Changes in noncontrolling interests
8
8
Equity, December 31, 2010
$45,418
$92,532
$(96,161)
$(18,743)
$ 23,046
$126
$ 23,172
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2011
Equity, January 1, 2011
$45,418
$  92,532
$  (96,161)
$(18,743)
$ 23,046 
$126
$ 23,172
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
15,855
15,855
15,855
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(3,142)
(3,142)
(3,142)
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 12,713
$ 12,713
Cash dividends declared—common stock
(3,473)
(3,473)
(3,473)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (20,669,785 shares)
2,394
2,394
2,394
Purchases (1,717,246 shares) and  
sales (4,920,198 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(56)
231
175
175
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (88,683,716 shares)
(15,034)
(15,034)
(15,034)
Changes in other equity
317
317
317
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(29)
(29)
Equity, December 31, 2011
$48,129
$104,857
$(110,963)
$(21,885)
$ 20,138
$  97
$ 20,236
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 76 =====
75
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2012
Equity, January 1, 2012
$48,129
$104,857
$(110,963)
$(21,885)
$ 20,138 
$  97
$ 20,236
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
16,604
16,604
16,604
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(3,874)
(3,874)
(3,874)
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 12,731
$ 12,731
Cash dividends declared—common stock
(3,773)
(3,773)
(3,773)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (15,091,320 shares)
1,532
1,532
1,532
Purchases (2,406,007 shares) and  
sales (2,746,169 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(48)
(160)
(208)
(208)
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (61,246,371 shares)
(12,008)
(12,008)
(12,008)
Changes in other equity
448
448
448
Changes in noncontrolling interests
27
27
Equity, December 31, 2012
$50,110
$117,641
$(123,131)
$(25,759)
$ 18,860
$124
$ 18,984
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 77 =====
76
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
76
Note A. 
Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and foot-
notes of the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM or 
the company) have been prepared in accordance with accounting 
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP).
	
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain 
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers 
for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from 
the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior year amounts 
have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation. 
This is annotated where applicable.
	
Noncontrolling interest amounts in income of $11 million, $6 mil-
lion and $9 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 
2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, are included in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item. 
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM 
and its controlled subsidiaries, which are generally majority owned. 
Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported 
in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Net 
income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest is 
reported as described above in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
ings. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are included in 
the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. Investments in 
business entities in which the company does not have control, but 
has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and 
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method and 
the company’s proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in 
other (income) and expense. The accounting policy for other invest-
ments in equity securities is on pages 84 and 85 within “Marketable 
Securities.” Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities are 
primarily accounted for using the cost method. All intercompany 
transactions and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP 
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that 
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses 
and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are reported in 
the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclo-
sures. These estimates are based on management’s best 
knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that the 
company may undertake in the future and on various other assump-
tions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. 
As a result, actual results may be different from these estimates. See 
“Critical Accounting Estimates” on pages 59 to 61 for a discussion 
of the company’s critical accounting estimates.
Revenue
The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable 
and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable 
and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement, 
delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and 
collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until 
products have been shipped or services have been provided to the 
client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client 
acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have 
lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria 
specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied. 
The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until 
all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved.
	
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers, 
resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) when the 
reseller has: economic substance apart from the company, credit 
risk, title and risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee to the company 
is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end user, the com-
pany has no further obligations related to bringing about resale or 
delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
	
The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns, stock 
rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allowances. (See 
Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves” 
included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K). Revenue 
is recognized only if these estimates can be reasonably and reliably 
determined. The company bases its estimates on historical results 
taking into consideration the type of client, the type of transaction 
and the specifics of each arrangement. Payments made under 
cooperative marketing programs are recognized as an expense only 
if the company receives from the client an identifiable benefit suf-
ficiently separable from the product sale whose fair value can be 
reasonably and reliably estimated. If the company does not receive 
an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale 
whose fair value can be reasonably estimated, such payments are 
recorded as a reduction of revenue.
	
Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services 
is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent 
between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company is 
a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered to 
determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most nota-
bly whether the company is the primary obligor to the client, or has 
inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the company 
adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service, was 
involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, has lati-
tude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk.
	
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes 
assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and 
concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In addition 
to the aforementioned general policies, the following are the specific 
revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements 
and for each major category of revenue.


===== PAGE 78 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
77
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist 
of multiple deliverables of its products and services based on the 
needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any combina-
tion of services, software, hardware and/or financing. For example, 
a client may purchase a server that includes operating system soft-
ware. In addition, the arrangement may include post-contract 
support for the software and a contract for post-warranty mainte-
nance service for the hardware. These types of arrangements can 
also include financing provided by the company. These arrange-
ments consist of multiple deliverables, with the hardware and 
software delivered in one reporting period and the software support 
and hardware maintenance services delivered across multiple 
reporting periods. In another example, a client may outsource the 
running of its datacenter operations to the company on a long-term, 
multiple-year basis and periodically purchase servers and/or soft-
ware products from the company to upgrade or expand its facility. 
The outsourcing services are provided on a continuous basis across 
multiple reporting periods and the hardware and software products 
are delivered in one reporting period. To the extent that a deliverable 
in a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject to specific account-
ing guidance that deliverable is accounted for in accordance with 
such specific guidance. Examples of such arrangements may 
include leased hardware which is subject to specific leasing guid-
ance or software which is subject to specific software revenue 
recognition guidance on whether and/or how to separate multiple-
deliverable arrangements into separate units of accounting 
(separability) and how to allocate the arrangement consideration 
among those separate units of accounting (allocation). For all other 
deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, the guidance 
below is applied for separability and allocation. A multiple-deliver-
able arrangement is separated into more than one unit of accounting 
if the following criteria are met:
•	
The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone 
basis; and 
•	
If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative  
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the  
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially  
in the control of the company. 
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as 
one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being recog-
nized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the earlier 
of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered element 
is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element and there is a 
relative selling price for all units of accounting in an arrangement, 
the arrangement consideration is allocated to the separate units of 
accounting based on each unit’s relative selling price. The following 
revenue policies are then applied to each unit of accounting, as 
applicable.
	
Revenue from the company’s business analytics, Smarter Planet 
and cloud offerings follow the specific revenue recognition policies 
for multiple deliverable arrangements and for each major category 
of revenue depending on the type of offering which can be com-
prised of services, hardware and/or software. 
Services
The company’s primary services offerings include information tech-
nology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourcing, application 
management services, consulting and systems integration, technol-
ogy infrastructure and system maintenance, Web hosting and the 
design and development of complex IT systems to a client’s speci-
fications (design and build). These services are provided on a 
time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-price 
per measure of output contract and the contract terms range from 
less than one year to over 10 years.
	
Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing 
contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided using 
either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line basis over 
the term of the contract. Under the output method, the amount of 
revenue recognized is based on the services delivered in the period.
	
Revenue from application management services, technology 
infrastructure and system maintenance and Web hosting contracts 
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts. 
Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor 
hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue 
related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts 
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
	
Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recog-
nized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under 
the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs 
incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs 
to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original 
estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward comple-
tion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may 
result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs, 
and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which 
the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known by 
the company.
	
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its ser-
vices contracts accounted for under the POC method in order to 
determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and prof-
its require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that the 
contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remain-
der of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC method 
services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
	
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to 
recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income 
of $7,281 million and $7,363 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, 
respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. In other services contracts, the company performs the 
services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable of 
$1,998 million and $2,166 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, 
respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in 
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
	
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs 
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. 
Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months. 
 


===== PAGE 79 =====
78
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
78
Hardware
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of 
system servers, storage solutions, retail store systems and the sale 
of semiconductors. The company also offers installation services 
for its more complex products.
	
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is recog-
nized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there are no 
unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final accep-
tance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties and 
remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunctory are 
accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. Revenue 
from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a straight-line 
basis over the term of the rental or lease.
Software
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is rec-
ognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue recognition 
criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring license charge) 
license software is recognized on a straight-line basis over the 
period that the client is entitled to use the license. Revenue from 
post-contract support, which may include unspecified upgrades on 
a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized on a straight-line basis 
over the period such items are delivered. In multiple-deliverable 
arrangements that include software that is more than incidental to 
the products or services as a whole (software multiple-deliverable 
arrangements), software and software-related elements are accounted 
for in accordance with software revenue recognition guidance. 
Software-related elements include software products and services 
for which a software deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tan-
gible products containing software components and non-software 
components that function together to deliver the tangible product’s 
essential functionality are not within the scope of software revenue 
recognition guidance and are accounted for based on other appli-
cable revenue recognition guidance.
	
A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into 
more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria are met:
•	
The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent 
on the undelivered element(s);
•	
There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair 
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is based 
on the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately 
by the company on a regular basis and not as part of the  
multiple-deliverable arrangement; and 
•	
Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmination 
of the earnings process for that element(s).
If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is accounted 
for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being 
recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the 
earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered 
element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element and 
there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an arrange-
ment, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the separate 
units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE of fair value. 
There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE of fair value 
of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for the delivered 
item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used to allocate the 
arrangement consideration. Under the residual method, the amount 
of consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals the total 
arrangement consideration less the aggregate VSOE of fair value of 
the undelivered elements.
	
The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have 
a stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing 
software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these 
multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software deliv-
erable and the non-software deliverables based on the relative 
selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using the 
hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of sell-
ing price (BESP). In the limited circumstances where the company 
cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of the 
deliverables in the arrangement, including the software deliverable, 
BESP is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.
Financing
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financing 
leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the effec-
tive interest method. Operating lease income is recognized on a 
straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Best Estimate of Selling Price
In certain limited instances, the company is not able to establish 
VSOE for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When 
VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to establish 
the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is determined 
based on competitor prices for similar deliverables when sold 
separately.
	
When the company is unable to establish selling price using 
VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrange-
ment consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price 
at which the company would transact a sale if the product or service 
were sold on a stand-alone basis. Due to the fact that the company 
sells its products and services on a stand-alone basis, and therefore 
has established VSOE for its products and services offerings, the 
company uses BESP to determine the relative selling price for a 
product or service in a multiple-deliverable arrangement on an infre-
quent basis. An example of when BESP would be used is when the 
company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE does not 
yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to selling the 
new product on a stand-alone basis.


===== PAGE 80 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
79
	
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors 
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including 
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, 
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing 
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that 
includes review and approval by the company’s management. In 
addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its 
products and services, in addition to BESP.
Services Costs
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs 
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred. 
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external 
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method are 
deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred to date, 
as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill the con-
tract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the initial 
phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subsequently 
amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup costs related 
to the installation of systems and processes and are amortized on 
a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, not to 
exceed the term of the contract. Additionally, fixed assets associated 
with outsourcing contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a 
straight-line basis over the expected useful life of the asset. If an 
asset is contract specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter 
of the useful life of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to 
clients in excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in out-
sourcing arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line 
basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of benefit 
not to exceed the term of the contract. The company performs peri-
odic reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract 
transition and setup costs. This review is done by comparing the 
estimated minimum remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract 
to the unamortized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted 
cash flows are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, an 
impairment loss is recognized.
	
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,424 million 
and $2,589 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. 
Amortization of deferred services transition and setup costs was 
estimated at December 31, 2012 to be $819 million in 2013, $509 
million in 2014, $430 million in 2015, $277 million in 2016 and $390 
million thereafter.
	
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of 
acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $51 million 
and $65 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Amor-
tization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value 
of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of revenue and was 
estimated at December 31, 2012 to be $22 million in 2013, $19 million 
in 2014, $9 million in 2015, $2 million in 2016 and less than $1 million 
thereafter. In situations in which an outsourcing contract is termi-
nated, the terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse 
the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unam-
ortized deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets utilized 
in the delivery of services and to pay any additional costs incurred 
by the company to transition the services.
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of 
licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research, 
development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to 
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been 
established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capitalized 
amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging 
up to three years and are recorded in software cost within cost of 
sales. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure that unam-
ortized program costs remain recoverable from future revenue. 
Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged to soft-
ware cost within cost of sales as incurred.
	
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to pur-
chase or to create and implement internal-use software programs, 
including software coding, installation, testing and certain data 
conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
line basis over periods up to two years and are recorded in selling, 
general and administrative expense. 
Product Warranties
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that gener-
ally range up to three years, with the majority being either one or 
three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard to the 
deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for the related 
deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs standard to 
the deliverable based on historical warranty claim experience and 
estimates of future spending, and applies this estimate to the rev-
enue stream for products under warranty. Estimated future costs 
for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in the current period 
are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is reviewed quar-
terly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining obligation based 
on the anticipated expenditures over the balance of the obligation 
period. Adjustments are made when actual warranty claim experi-
ence differs from estimates. Costs from fixed-price support or 
maintenance contracts, including extended warranty contracts, are 
recognized as incurred.


===== PAGE 81 =====
80
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
80
	
Revenue from separately priced extended warranty contracts 
is recorded as deferred income and subsequently recognized on 
a straight-line basis over the delivery period. Changes in deferred 
income for extended warranty contracts, and in the warranty liability 
for standard warranties, which are included in other accrued 
expenses and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position, are presented in the following tables:
Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
2012
2011
Balance at January 1
$ 407
$ 375
Current period accruals
394
435
Accrual adjustments to reflect actual experience
(15)
18
Charges incurred
(392)
(420)
Balance at December 31
$ 394
$ 407
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
($ in millions)
2012
2011
Balance at January 1
$ 636
$ 670
Revenue deferred for new extended  
warranty contracts
268
314
Amortization of deferred revenue
(301)
(330)
Other*
4
(19)
Balance at December 31
$ 606
$ 636
Current portion
$ 289
$ 301
Noncurrent portion
317
335
Balance at December 31
$ 606
$ 636
* Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred 
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Expense and Other Income
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to 
income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling products 
and services are classified as selling expense and include such 
items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and travel. 
General and administrative expense includes such items as com-
pensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance 
and office rental. In addition, general and administrative expense 
includes other operating items such as an allowance for credit losses, 
workforce rebalancing accruals for contractually obligated payments 
to employees terminated in the ongoing course of business, acquisi-
tion costs related to business combinations, amortization of certain 
intangible assets and environmental remediation costs.
Advertising and Promotional Expense
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as 
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors are 
recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in the period 
in which the related advertising and promotional expense is incurred. 
Advertising and promotional expense, which includes media, agency 
and promotional expense, was $1,339 million, $1,373 million and 
$1,337 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and is recorded 
in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are expensed 
as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to produce the finished 
product after technological feasibility has been established are capi-
talized as an intangible asset. See “Software Costs” on page 79. 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intellectual 
property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade secrets 
and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to third parties 
are licensing/royalty-based and others are transaction-based sales 
and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based fees involve transfers 
in which the company earns the income over time, or the amount 
of income is not fixed or determinable until the licensee sells 
future related products (i.e., variable royalty, based upon licensee’s 
revenue). Sales and other transfers typically include transfers of 
IP whereby the company has fulfilled its obligations and the fee 
received is fixed or determinable at the transfer date. The company 
also enters into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and 
income from these arrangements is recorded when earned. In addi-
tion, the company earns income from certain custom development 
projects for strategic technology partners and specific clients. The 
company records the income from these projects when the fee is 
realized and earned, is not refundable and is not dependent upon 
the success of the project.
Other (Income) and Expense
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than 
from Global Financing external business transactions), gains and 
losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from 
securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain real 
estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, 
gains and losses from the sale of businesses and amounts related 
to accretion of asset retirement obligations. 


===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
81
Business Combinations and  
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the acqui-
sition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired, the 
liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree 
are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Goodwill represents 
the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets, 
including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. The 
primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies 
between the acquired entities and the company and the acquired 
assembled workforce, neither of which qualifies as an identifiable 
intangible asset. Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to 
applicable reporting units based on expected revenues. Identifiable 
intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. 
Amortization of completed technology is recorded in Cost, and 
amortization of all other intangible assets is recorded in SG&A 
expense. Acquisition-related costs, including advisory, legal, 
accounting, valuation and other costs, are expensed in the periods 
in which the costs are incurred. The results of operations of acquired 
businesses are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements 
from the acquisition date.
Impairment
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible 
assets, are tested for impairment based on undiscounted cash flows 
and, if impaired, written down to fair value based on either discounted 
cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intan-
gible assets are tested annually, in the fourth quarter, for impairment 
and whenever changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may 
exist. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level which is the operat-
ing segment, or a business, which is one level below that operating 
segment (the “component” level) if discrete financial information is 
prepared and regularly reviewed by management at the segment 
level. Components are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they 
have similar economic characteristics.
Depreciation and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated 
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. The 
estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows: 
buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 years; land 
improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office equipment, 2 
to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold 
improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated 
useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years.
	
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after techno-
logical feasibility has been established are amortized over periods 
ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software 
are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods up to 2 years. 
Other intangible assets are amortized over periods between 1 and 
7 years. 
Environmental
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are 
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup 
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will 
incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated, 
the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental 
liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental 
liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for 
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associated 
with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are initially 
recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs are 
capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related assets 
by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs are sub-
sequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related assets. 
Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records period-to-
period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the passage of 
time in interest expense and revisions to either the timing or the 
amount of the original expected cash flows to the related assets.
Defined Benefit Pension and  
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related 
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Finan-
cial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference 
between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at 
December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension 
plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO), 
which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected 
to be paid upon retirement based on employee services already 
rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the non-
pension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is the 
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which rep-
resents the actuarial present value of postretirement benefits 
attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value of 
plan assets represents the current market value of cumulative com-
pany and participant contributions made to an irrevocable trust 
fund, held for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by 
the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets 
exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as 
a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, 
with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets, 
are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension post-
retirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.
	
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension postretire-
ment benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value of 
benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value of 
plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is 
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated State-
ment of Financial Position.


===== PAGE 83 =====
82
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
82
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit cost/
(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings and 
includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, 
amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and (gains)/losses previ-
ously recognized as a component of OCI and amortization of the 
net transition asset remaining in accumulated other comprehensive 
income/(loss) (AOCI). Service cost represents the actuarial present 
value of participant benefits earned in the current year. Interest cost 
represents the time value of money cost associated with the pas-
sage of time. Certain events, such as changes in the employee base, 
plan amendments and changes in actuarial assumptions, result in 
a change in the benefit obligation and the corresponding change in 
OCI. The result of these events is amortized as a component of net 
periodic cost/(income) over the service lives or life expectancy of 
the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts 
exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or 
the value of plan assets. Net periodic cost/(income) is recorded in 
Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
based on the employees’ respective functions.
	
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized 
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a component 
of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income. 
Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are subse-
quently recognized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) 
pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions of appli-
cable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result of 
differences between actual experience and assumptions or as a 
result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/
(credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior 
service granted in plan amendments.
	
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/ 
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the 
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the 
plans and use participant-specific information such as compensa-
tion, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, 
including estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan 
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and 
mortality rates.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is 
recorded when the employee renders service to the company. The 
charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ respective 
functions.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
based awards granted to employees. The company measures 
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the 
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a 
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee 
requisite service period. The company estimates the fair value of 
stock options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The company 
also grants its employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including 
Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Performance Share 
Units (PSUs). RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that 
entitle the holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, 
typically over a one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards 
is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s 
stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. All 
stock-based compensation cost is recorded in Cost, SG&A, and 
RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the 
employees’ respective functions.
	
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result 
in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on the 
amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory tax rate 
in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Differences 
between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial reporting 
purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the income tax 
return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the tax deduction 
exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds the tax deduction and 
no additional paid-in capital exists from previous awards).
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income 
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary 
differences between asset and liability amounts that are recognized 
for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are recog-
nized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured 
by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allowances are 
recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will 
more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation 
allowance, management considers all available evidence for each 
jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future tax-
able income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. 
When the company changes its determination as to the amount of 
deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is 
adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the 
period in which such determination is made.
	
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the com-
pany’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company 
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review 
by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions are measured at the 
largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being 
realized upon settlement. The current portion of tax liabilities is 
included in taxes and the noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is 
included in other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. To the extent that new information becomes available which 
causes the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy 
of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact 
income tax expense in the period in which such determination is 
made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for 
potential tax assessments are included in income tax expense. 


===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
83
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local func-
tional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars at 
year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded 
in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-aver-
age rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
	
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other non-
monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and 
branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approxi-
mate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the 
assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated in a 
currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end exchange 
rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in other (income) 
and expense. Income and expense items are translated at the 
weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. 
These translation gains and losses are included in net income for 
the period in which exchange rates change.
Derivative Financial Instruments
All derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid expenses 
and other current assets, investments and sundry assets, other 
accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. Classification 
of each derivative as current or noncurrent is based upon whether 
the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months. 
To qualify for hedge accounting, the company requires that the 
instruments be effective in reducing the risk exposure that they are 
designated to hedge. For instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge 
designation criteria also require that it be probable that the under­
lying transaction will occur. Instruments that meet established 
accounting criteria are formally designated as hedges. These criteria 
demonstrate that the derivative is expected to be highly effective 
at offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows of the underlying 
exposure both at inception of the hedging relationship and on an 
ongoing basis. The method of assessing hedge effectiveness and 
measuring hedge ineffectiveness is formally documented at hedge 
inception. The company assesses hedge effectiveness and measures 
hedge ineffectiveness at least quarterly throughout the designated 
hedge period.
	
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company 
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a rec-
ognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized firm 
commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign 
currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of a 
forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received or paid 
related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge 
attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge 
of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign opera-
tion. In addition, the company may enter into derivative contracts 
that economically hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge 
accounting does not apply or the company elects not to apply 
hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists a natural hedging 
relationship in which changes in the fair value of the derivative, which 
are recognized currently in net income, act as an economic offset 
to changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item(s).
	
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a fair 
value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of the 
underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each period. 
For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments are recorded 
as adjustments to interest expense and cost of financing in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges of currency risk 
associated with recorded financial assets or liabilities, derivative fair 
value adjustments are recognized in other (income) and expense in 
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Changes in the fair value of 
a derivative that is designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, net 
of applicable taxes, in OCI, in the Consolidated Statement of Com-
prehensive Income. When net income is affected by the variability of 
the underlying cash flow, the applicable offsetting amount of the gain 
or loss from the derivative that is deferred in AOCI is released to net 
income and reported in interest expense, cost, SG&A expense or 
other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
ings based on the nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. 
Effectiveness for net investment hedging derivatives is measured on 
a spot-to-spot basis. The effective portion of changes in the fair value 
of net investment hedging derivatives and other non-derivative finan-
cial instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded 
as foreign currency translation adjustments in OCI. Changes in the 
fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging derivative 
excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded in interest 
expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge ceases 
to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are included in 
net income each period until the instrument matures. When the 
derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or liability is no 
longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except as required under 
other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives that are not desig-
nated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair value of derivatives 
that do not effectively offset changes in the fair value of the underlying 
hedged item throughout the designated hedge period (collectively, 
“ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net income each period and are 
reported in other (income) and expense. When a cash flow hedging 
relationship is discontinued, the net gain or loss in AOCI must gener-
ally remain in AOCI until the item that was hedged affects earnings. 
However, when it is probable that a forecasted transaction will not 
occur by the end of the originally specified time period or within an 
additional two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss in AOCI 
must be reclassified into earnings immediately. The company reports 
cash flows arising from derivative financial instruments designated as 
fair value or cash flow hedges consistent with the classification of cash 
flows from the underlying hedged items that these derivatives are 
hedging. Accordingly, the cash flows associated with derivatives des-
ignated as fair value or cash flow hedges are classified in cash flows 
from operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. 
Cash flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges 
and derivatives that do not qualify as hedges are reported in cash 
flows from investing activities. For currency swaps designated as 
hedges of foreign currency denominated debt (included in the com-
pany’s debt risk management program as addressed in note D, 
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 94 to 98), cash flows directly asso-
ciated with the settlement of the principal element of these swaps 
are reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from financing 
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.


===== PAGE 85 =====
84
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
84
Financial Instruments
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the com-
pany uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based 
on market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet 
date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 92 to 94 for 
further information. All methods of assessing fair value result in a 
general approximation of value, and such value may never actually 
be realized.
Fair Value Measurement 
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be 
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly 
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. 
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain 
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy:
•	
Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets  
for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed  
at the measurement date;
•	
Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within  
Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either 
directly or indirectly; and
•	
Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such 
data is available without undue cost and effort. 
	
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market 
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies such 
items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair 
value is based upon internally developed models that use current 
market-based or independently sourced market parameters such 
as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using internally 
generated models are classified according to the lowest level input 
or value driver that is significant to the valuation.
	
The determination of fair value considers various factors includ-
ing interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial 
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses 
a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensurate 
with the duration of the instrument.
	
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the com-
pany considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base 
valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below 
for several parameters that market participants would consider in 
determining fair value:
•	
Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial 
instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a 
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market 
to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
•	
Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s 
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at  
fair value. The methodology is consistent with that applied  
in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but  
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed  
in the credit default swap market.
As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a 
discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs 
such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and 
forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs relate 
to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets which are 
available for the full term of the derivative.
	
Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecur-
ring basis. These assets include equity method investments that are 
recognized at fair value at the measurement date to the extent that 
they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. Certain 
assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis can be 
subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These assets 
include available-for-sale equity investments that are deemed to 
be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an other-than-
temporary impairment of a financial instrument, fair value is measured 
using a model described above.
	
Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible finan-
cial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair value, on 
an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not permitted 
to be accounted for at fair value under other accounting standards. 
This election is irrevocable. The company does not apply the fair 
value option to any eligible assets or liabilities.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at 
the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.
Marketable Securities
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that 
are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance 
sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be 
realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are 
included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable 
equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported 
at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes, 
in OCI. The realized gains and losses for available-for-sale securities 
are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and losses are calculated 
based on the specific identification method.


===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
85
	
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in market 
value has occurred, the company considers the duration that, and 
extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below its cost, the 
financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer or underly-
ing collateral of a security; and the company’s intent and ability to 
retain the security in order to allow for an anticipated recovery in fair 
value. Other-than-temporary declines in fair value from amortized 
cost for available-for-sale equity and debt securities that the company 
intends to sell or would more likely than not be required to sell before 
the expected recovery of the amortized cost basis are charged to 
other (income) and expense in the period in which the loss occurs. 
For debt securities that the company has no intent to sell and believes 
that it more likely than not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, 
only the credit loss component of the impairment is recognized in 
other (income) and expense, while the remaining loss is recognized 
in OCI. The credit loss component recognized in other (income) and 
expense is identified as the amount of the principal cash flows not 
expected to be received over the remaining term of the debt security 
as projected using the company’s cash flow projections. 
Inventories
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at the 
lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the sale of 
inventories are reflected in net cash provided by operating activities 
in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. 
Allowance for Credit Losses
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of a 
product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable 
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receivables 
is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated based 
on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and any specific, 
known troubled accounts.
Financing Receivables
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing 
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with 
lease accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets 
recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The com-
pany determines its allowances for credit losses on financing 
receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables and 
loan receivables. The company further segments the portfolio into 
two classes: major markets and growth markets.
	
When calculating the allowances, the company considers its abil-
ity to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equipment and 
by considering the current fair market value of any other collateral. 
The value of the equipment is the net realizable value. The allowance 
for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales and customer 
loans includes an assessment of the entire balance of the capital 
lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that 
the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which are 
applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows: 
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing receiv-
ables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily 
consists of an analysis based upon current information available 
about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, pub-
lished credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as well 
as the current economic environment, collateral net of repossession 
cost and prior collection history. For loans that are collateral depen-
dent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the collateral 
when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the company 
determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates 
an estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For 
those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company records 
a specific reserve. 
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated 
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different 
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. 
This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, 
term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history. Factors that could 
result in actual receivable losses that are materially different from 
the estimated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a 
significant change in the economic health of a particular client that 
represents a concentration in the company’s receivables portfolio. 
Other Credit-Related Policies
Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has 
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual 
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired loans or 
nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other accounts 
for which it is likely that the company will be unable to collect all 
amounts due according to original terms of the lease or loan agree-
ment. Income recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash 
collections are first applied as a reduction to principal outstanding. 
Any cash received in excess of principal payments outstanding is 
recognized as interest income. Receivables may be removed from 
non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in client 
circumstances.
Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance 
when management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable 
is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the 
allowance.
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when 
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the 
original billing date.
Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all financ-
ing receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment 
on a quarterly basis. The company considers any loan with an indi-
vidually evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the 
level of impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status 
as appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services 
and are unsecured. These loans are subjected to credit analysis to 
evaluate the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions 
are taken to mitigate risks in the loan agreements which include 
covenants to protect against credit deterioration during the life of 
the obligation.


===== PAGE 87 =====
86
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
86
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at the 
inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets at 
the end of the lease term. The company periodically reassesses the 
realizable value of its lease residual values. Any anticipated increases 
in specific future residual values are not recognized before realiza-
tion through remarketing efforts. Anticipated decreases in specific 
future residual values that are considered to be other-than-temporary 
are recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded as 
an adjustment to the residual value estimate. For sales-type and 
direct-financing leases, this reduction lowers the recorded net 
investment and is recognized as a loss charged to financing income 
in the period in which the estimate is changed, as well as an adjust-
ment to unearned income to reduce future-period financing income.
Common Stock
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock 
as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Trea-
sury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury 
stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a 
weighted-average basis. 
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method. 
The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common 
stock and participating securities according to dividends and dividend 
equivalents and their respective participation rights in undistributed 
earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed by dividing net 
income by the weighted-average number of common shares out-
standing for the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is computed 
on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common 
stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding 
during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential 
common shares include outstanding stock options, stock awards and 
convertible notes. 
Note B.  
Accounting Changes
Standards Implemented
In February 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) 
issued additional guidance regarding reclassifications out of AOCI. 
The new guidance requires entities to report the effect of significant 
reclassifications out of AOCI on the respective line items in net 
income unless the amounts are not reclassified in their entirety to 
net income. For amounts that are not required to be reclassified in 
their entirety to net income in the same reporting period, entities are 
required to cross-reference other disclosures that provide additional 
detail about those amounts. For the company, the new guidance is 
effective prospectively for all interim and annual periods beginning 
January 1, 2013 with early adoption permitted. The company elected 
to early adopt the guidance. There was no impact in the consoli-
dated financial results as the guidance related only to additional 
disclosures. See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 107 to 110 for 
further information.
	
In July 2012, the FASB issued amended guidance that simplifies 
how entities test indefinite-lived intangible assets other than goodwill 
for impairment. After an assessment of certain qualitative factors, if 
it is determined to be more likely than not that an indefinite-lived 
intangible asset is impaired, entities must perform the quantitative 
impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test is optional. The 
amended guidance was effective for annual and interim impairment 
tests performed for fiscal years beginning after September 15, 2012, 
with early adoption permitted. The company elected to adopt this 
guidance for its 2012 impairment testing of indefinite-lived intan-
gible assets performed in the fourth quarter. There was no impact 
in the consolidated financial results.
	
In May 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance and disclosure 
requirements for fair value measurements. These changes were 
effective January 1, 2012 on a prospective basis. These amendments 
did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
	
In September 2011, the FASB issued additional disclosure 
requirements for entities which participate in multi-employer pension 
plans. The purpose of the new disclosures was to provide financial 
statement users with information about an employer’s level of par-
ticipation in these plans and the financial health of significant plans. 
The new disclosures were effective beginning with the full year 2011 
financial statements. The company does not participate in any mate-
rial multi-employer plans. There was no impact in the consolidated 
financial results as the changes relate only to additional disclosures.
	
In September 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance that sim-
plified how entities test goodwill for impairment. After an assessment 
of certain qualitative factors, if it is determined to be more likely than 
not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying 
amount, entities must perform the quantitative analysis of the goodwill 
impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test(s) is optional. The 
guidance was effective January 1, 2012 with early adoption permitted. 
The company adopted this guidance for the 2011 goodwill impairment 
test. There was no impact in the consolidated financial results.
	
In June 2011, the FASB issued amended disclosure requirements 
for the presentation of OCI and AOCI. OCI is comprised of costs, 
expenses, gains and losses that are included in comprehensive 
income but excluded from net income, and AOCI comprises the 
aggregated balances of OCI in equity. The amended guidance elimi-
nated the option to present period changes in OCI as part of the 
Statement of Changes in Equity. Under the amended guidance, all 
period changes in OCI are to be presented either in a single continu-
ous statement of comprehensive income, or in two separate, but 
consecutive financial statements. Only summary totals are to be 
included in the AOCI section of the Statement of Changes in Equity. 
In December 2011, the FASB deferred the requirement to present 
reclassifications from AOCI on the face of the Consolidated State-
ment of Earnings. The changes were effective January 1, 2012 with 
early adoption permitted. The company adopted the two statement 
approach effective with its full year 2011 financial statements. There 
was no impact in the consolidated financial results as the amend-
ments related only to changes in financial statement presentation.


===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
87
	
In December 2010, the FASB issued amended guidance to 
clarify the acquisition date that should be used for reporting pro-
forma financial information for business combinations. If comparative 
financial statements are presented, the pro-forma revenue and earn-
ings of the combined entity for the comparable prior reporting 
period should be reported as though the acquisition date for all 
business combinations that occurred during the current year had 
been completed as of the beginning of the comparable prior annual 
reporting period. The amendments in this guidance were effective 
on a prospective basis for business combinations for which the 
acquisition date was on or after January 1, 2011. There was no 
impact in the consolidated financial results as the amendments 
relate only to additional disclosures. In addition, the company has 
had no acquisitions which required pro-forma financial information.
	
In December 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the guid-
ance on goodwill impairment testing. The amendments modified 
step 1 of the goodwill impairment test for reporting units with zero 
or negative carrying amounts. For those reporting units, an entity is 
required to perform step 2 of the goodwill impairment test if it is more 
likely than not that a goodwill impairment exists. In making that 
determination, an entity should consider whether there are any 
adverse qualitative factors indicating that impairment may exist. The 
amendments were effective January 1, 2011 and did not have an 
impact in the consolidated financial results.
	
In July 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the disclosure 
requirements about the credit quality of financing receivables and 
the allowance for credit losses. The purpose of the additional dis-
closures was to enable users of financial statements to better 
understand the nature of credit risk inherent in an entity’s portfolio 
of financing receivables and how that risk is analyzed. For end-of-
period balances, the new disclosures were required to be made in 
all interim and annual periods ending on or after December 15, 2010. 
For activity during a reporting period, the disclosures were required 
to be included in all interim and annual periods after January 1, 2011. 
In January 2011, the FASB temporarily deferred the disclosures 
regarding troubled debt restructurings which were included in the 
requirements of this amendment. Subsequently, in April 2011, the 
FASB issued additional guidance and clarifications to help creditors 
in determining whether a creditor has granted a concession, and 
whether a debtor is experiencing financial difficulties for purposes 
of determining whether a restructuring constitutes a troubled debt 
restructuring. The new guidance and the previously deferred dis-
closures were effective July 1, 2011 applied retrospectively to 
January 1, 2011. Prospective application was required for any new 
impairments identified as a result of this guidance. These changes 
did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
	
In January 2010, the FASB issued additional disclosure require-
ments for fair value measurements. According to the guidance, the 
fair value hierarchy disclosures should be disaggregated by class of 
assets and liabilities. A class is often a subset of assets or liabilities 
within a line item in the statement of financial position. In addition, 
significant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 of the fair value hierar-
chy are required to be disclosed. These additional requirements 
were effective January 1, 2010 for quarterly and annual reporting. 
These amendments did not have an impact in the consolidated 
financial results as this guidance relates only to additional disclo-
sures. Certain disclosure requirements relating to fair value 
measurements using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) were 
deferred until January 1, 2011. These additional requirements also 
did not have an impact in the consolidated financial results as they 
related only to additional disclosures.
Note C.  
Acquisitions/Divestitures
Acquisitions
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in the 
tables in this note, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions are 
reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of 
acquired cash and cash equivalents. 
2012
In 2012, the company completed 11 acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $3,964 million. 
Kenexa Corporation (Kenexa)—On December 3, 2012, the com-
pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Kenexa, a publicly 
held company, for cash consideration of $1,351 million. Kenexa, a 
leading provider of recruiting and talent management solutions, 
brings a unique combination of cloud-based technology and consult-
ing services that integrates both people and processes, providing 
solutions to engage a smarter, more effective workforce across their 
most critical businesses functions. Goodwill of $1,014 million has 
been assigned to the Software ($771 million) and Global Technology 
Services (GTS) ($243 million) segments. As of the acquisition date, it 
is expected that approximately 10 percent of the goodwill will be 
deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life 
of the identified intangible assets acquired is 6.5 years. 
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed eight 
other acquisitions: in the first quarter, Green Hat Software Limited 
(Green Hat), Emptoris Inc. (Emptoris) and Worklight, Inc. (Worklight), 
all privately held companies, and DemandTec, Inc. (DemandTec), 
a publicly held company; in the second quarter, Varicent Software 
Inc. (Varicent), Vivisimo Inc. (Vivisimo) and Tealeaf Technology Inc. 
(Tealeaf), all privately held companies; and in the third quarter, 
Butterfly Software, Ltd. (Butterfly), a privately held company. Systems 
and Technology (STG) completed two acquisitions: in the first quarter, 
Platform Computing Corporation (Platform Computing), a privately 
held company; and in the third quarter, Texas Memory Systems 
(TMS), a privately held company. All acquisitions were for 100 percent 
of the acquired companies.


===== PAGE 89 =====
88
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
88
Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the company’s 
portfolio of product and services offerings. Green Hat helps custom-
ers improve the quality of software applications by enabling 
developers to use cloud computing technologies to conduct testing 
of a software application prior to its delivery. Emptoris expands the 
company’s cloud-based analytics offerings that provide supply chain 
intelligence leading to better inventory management and cost efficien-
cies. Worklight delivers mobile application management capabilities 
to clients across a wide range of industries. The acquisition enhances 
the company’s comprehensive mobile portfolio, which is designed to 
help global corporations leverage the proliferation of all mobile 
devices—from laptops and smartphones to tablets. DemandTec 
delivers cloud-based analytics software to help organizations improve 
their price, promotion and product mix within the broad context of 
enterprise commerce. Varicent’s software automates and analyzes 
data across sales, finance, human resources and IT departments to 
uncover trends and optimize sales performance and operations. Vivi-
simo software automates the discovery of big data, regardless of its 
format or where it resides, providing decision makers with a view of 
key business information necessary to drive new initiatives. Tealeaf 
provides a full suite of customer experience management software, 
which analyzes interactions on websites and mobile devices. Butterfly 
offers storage planning software and storage migration tools, helping 
companies save storage space, operational time, IT budget and 
power consumption. Platform Computing’s focused technical and 
distributed computing management software helps clients create, 
integrate and manage shared computing environments that are 
used in compute-and-data intensive applications such as simulations, 
computer modeling and analytics. TMS designs and sells high-
performance solid state storage solutions. 
	
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life of 
the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is 6.6 years. 
These identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line 
basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,880 million has been 
assigned to the Software ($1,412 million), Global Business Services 
(GBS) ($5 million), GTS ($21 million) and STG ($443 million) seg-
ments. As of the acquisition dates, it is expected that approximately 
15 percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December 31, 2012.
2012 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
 
Kenexa
Other 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$   133
$   278
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
98
217
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,014
1,880
Completed technology
 3 to 7
169
403
Client relationships
4 to 7
179
194
In-process R&D
N/A
—
11
Patents/trademarks
1 to 7
39
37 
Total assets acquired
1,632
3,020
Current liabilities
(93)
(143)
Noncurrent liabilities
(188)
(264)
Total liabilities assumed
(281)
(407)
Total purchase price
 
$1,351 
$2,613 
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
89
	
On February 1, 2013, the company announced that it had entered 
into a definitive agreement to acquire the software portfolio of Star 
Analytics Inc., a privately held business analytics company based in 
Redwood City, California. The combination of the company’s and Star 
Analytics software will advance the company’s business analytics 
initiatives. The acquisition is subject to customary closing conditions 
and is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2013.
	
On February 7, 2013, the company completed the acquisition of 
StoredIQ Inc. (StoredIQ), a privately held company based in Austin, 
Texas. StoredIQ will advance the company’s efforts to help clients 
derive value from big data and respond more efficiently to litigation 
and regulations, dispose of information that has outlived its purpose 
and lower data storage costs. At the date of issuance of the financial 
statements, the initial purchase accounting was not complete for 
this acquisition.
2011
In 2011, the company completed five acquisitions of privately held 
companies at an aggregate cost of $1,849 million. 
	
These acquisitions were completed as follows: in the second 
quarter, TRIRIGA, Inc. (TRIRIGA); and in the fourth quarter, i2, Algo-
rithmics, Inc. (Algorithmics), Q1 Labs and Curam Software Ltd. 
(Curam Software). TRIRIGA was integrated into the Software 
and GBS segments upon acquisition. All other acquisitions were 
integrated into the Software segment upon acquisition. All acquisi-
tions reflected 100 percent ownership of the acquired companies. 
	
TRIRIGA is a provider of facility and real estate management 
software solutions, which help clients make strategic decisions 
regarding space usage, evaluate alternative real estate initiatives, 
generate higher returns from capital projects and assess environ-
mental impact investments. The acquisition added advanced real 
estate intelligence to the company’s smarter buildings initiative. i2 
expanded the company’s Big Data analytics software for Smarter 
Cities by helping both public and private entities in government, law 
enforcement, retail, insurance and other industries access and ana-
lyze information they need to address crime, fraud and security 
threats. Algorithmics provides software and services for improved 
business insights at financial and insurance institutions to assess 
risk and address regulatory challenges. Q1 Labs is a provider of 
security intelligence software and accelerates efforts to help clients 
more intelligently secure their enterprises by applying analytics to 
correlate information from key security domains and creating security 
dashboards for their organizations. Curam Software is a provider 
of software and services which help governments improve the 
efficiency, effectiveness and accessibility of social programs for 
Smarter Cities. 
	
The overall weighted-average life of the indentified intangible 
assets acquired was 6.9 years. These identified intangible assets 
will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. 
Goodwill of $1,291 million was assigned to the Software ($1,277 
million) and GBS ($14 million) segments. As of the acquisition dates, 
it was expected that approximately 25 percent of the goodwill would 
be deductible for tax purposes.
	
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these 
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of 
December 31, 2011.
2011 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
Total 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$   251
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
88
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,291
Completed technology
 7
320
Client relationships
 7
222
Patents/trademarks
1 to 7
17 
Total assets acquired
2,190
Current liabilities
(191)
Noncurrent liabilities
(150)
Total liabilities assumed
(341)
Total purchase price
$1,849
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 91 =====
90
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
90
2010
In 2010, the company completed 17 acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $6,538 million.
Netezza Corporation (Netezza)—On November 10, 2010, the com-
pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Netezza, for cash 
consideration of $1,847 million. Netezza expanded the company’s 
business analytics initiatives to help clients gain faster insights into 
their business information, with increased performance at a lower 
cost of ownership. Netezza was integrated into the Software seg-
ment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table below, 
was entirely assigned to the Software segment. As of the acquisition 
date, it was expected that none of the goodwill would be deductible 
for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life of the 
identified intangible assets acquired was 6.9 years.
Sterling Commerce—On August 27, 2010, the company completed 
the acquisition of 100 percent of Sterling Commerce, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of AT&T, Inc., for cash consideration of $1,415 million. 
Sterling Commerce expanded the company’s ability to help clients 
accelerate their interactions with customers, partners and suppliers 
through dynamic business networks using either on-premise or 
cloud delivery models. Sterling Commerce was integrated into the 
Software segment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in 
the table below, was entirely assigned to the Software segment. As 
of the acquisition date, it was expected that none of the goodwill 
would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average 
useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired was 6.9 years. 
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed acqui-
sitions of 10 privately held companies and one publicly held 
company: in the first quarter, Lombardi Software, Inc. (Lombardi), 
Intelliden Inc. and Initiate Systems, Inc. (Initiate); in the second quar-
ter, Cast Iron Systems; in the third quarter, BigFix, Inc., Coremetrics 
and Datacap; and in the fourth quarter, Unica Corporation (Unica), 
a publicly held company, PSS Systems, OpenPages, Inc. (Open-
Pages) and Clarity Systems. GTS completed an acquisition in the 
first quarter: the core operating assets of Wilshire Credit Corporation 
(Wilshire). GBS also completed an acquisition in the first quarter: 
National Interest Security Company, LLC, a privately held company. 
STG completed acquisitions of two privately held companies: in the 
third quarter, Storwize; and in the fourth quarter, BLADE Network 
Technologies (BLADE). All acquisitions were for 100 percent of the 
acquired companies.
	
Lombardi is a leading provider of business process manage-
ment software and services, and became part of the company’s 
application integration software portfolio. Intelliden Inc. is a leading 
provider of intelligent network automation software and extended 
the company’s network management offerings. Initiate is a market 
leader in data integrity software for information sharing among 
healthcare and government organizations. Cast Iron Systems, a 
leading Software as a Service (SaaS) and cloud application integra-
tion provider, enhances the WebSphere business integration 
portfolio. BigFix, Inc. is a leading provider of high-performance 
enterprise systems and security management solutions that revo-
lutionizes the way IT organizations manage and secure their 
computing infrastructure. Coremetrics, a leader in Web analytics 
software, expanded the company’s business analytics capabilities 
by enabling organizations to use cloud computing services to 
develop faster, more targeted marketing campaigns. Datacap 
strengthens the company’s ability to help organizations digitize, 
manage and automate their information assets.
2010 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
Netezza
Sterling 
Commerce
Other 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$   218
$   196
$   377
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
73
106
209
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,410
1,032
2,312
Completed technology
 3 to 7
202
218
497
Client relationships
2 to 7
52
244
293
In-process R&D
N/A
4
—
13
Patents/trademarks
1 to 7
16
14
27 
Total assets acquired
1,975
1,810
3,728
Current liabilities
(9)
(129)
(161)
Noncurrent liabilities
(120)
(266)
(291)
Total liabilities assumed
(128)
(395)
(452)
Total purchase price
$1,847 
$1,415 
$3,277 
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
91
	
Unica, a leading provider of software and services used to auto-
mate marketing processes, expanded the company’s ability to help 
organizations analyze and predict customer preferences and 
develop more targeted marketing campaigns. PSS Systems is a 
leading provider of legal information governance and information 
management software. OpenPages is a leading provider of software 
that helps companies more easily identify and manage risk and 
compliance activities across the enterprise through a single man-
agement system. Clarity Systems delivers financial governance 
software that enables organizations to automate the process of col-
lecting, preparing, certifying and controlling financial statements for 
electronic filing. Wilshire’s mortgage servicing platform continues 
the strategic focus on the mortgage services industry and 
strengthens the commitment to deliver mortgage business process 
outsourcing solutions. National Interest Security Company strength-
ens the ability to deliver advanced analytics and IT solutions to the 
public sector. Storwize, a provider of in-line data compression appli-
ance solutions, helps the company to make it more affordable for 
clients to analyze massive amounts of data in order to provide new 
insights and business outcomes. BLADE provides server and top-
of-rack switches as well as software to virtualize and manage cloud 
computing and other workloads. 
	
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life 
of the identified intangible assets acquired was 6.4 years. These 
identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis 
over their useful lives. Goodwill of $2,312 million was assigned to 
the Software ($1,653 million), GTS ($32 million), GBS ($252 million) 
and STG ($375 million) segments. As of the acquisition dates, it 
was expected that none of the goodwill would be deductible for 
tax purposes.
Divestitures
2012
On April 17, 2012, the company announced that it had signed a 
definitive agreement with Toshiba TEC for the sale of its Retail Store 
Solutions business to Toshiba TEC. As part of the transaction, 
Toshiba TEC and the company also signed a multi-year business 
partner agreement to integrate retail store solutions for Smarter 
Commerce. The transaction price was $850 millon, and the com-
pany will receive approximately $800 million in cash, net of closing 
date working capital adjustments.
	
Through December 31, 2012, the company completed the first 
three phases of the sale. For the completed phases, the company 
received net proceeds of $546 million, recorded a note receivable 
of $251 million and recognized a net pre-tax gain of $446 million. 
The gain was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain 
transaction costs and the assets and liabilities sold. The gain was 
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State-
ment of Earnings and the net proceeds are reflected within 
divestitures of businesses, net of cash transferred within cash flows 
from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash 
Flows. In addition, in the third quarter, the company acquired a 19.9 
percent ownership interest for $161 million in Toshiba Global Com-
merce Solutions Holding Corporation, the new holding company 
that Toshiba TEC established for the business. The company will 
retain this ownership for a period of three years at which time 
Toshiba TEC will purchase the company’s equity interest for the 
initial acquisition value. This investment was recorded in investments 
and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Posi-
tion and the payment was reflected within purchases of marketable 
securities and other investments within cash flows from investing 
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
	
The company expects to close the next phase of the divestiture 
in the first quarter of 2013 with subsequent closings expected in 
future periods. Overall, the company expects to recognize a total 
pre-tax gain on the sale of approximately $500 million.
2011
During the fourth quarter of 2011, the company completed the 
divestiture of the iCluster business to Rocket Software. iCluster, 
which was acquired in the Data Mirror acquisition in 2007, was 
part of the Software business. This transaction was not material 
to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
During the second quarter of 2011, the company completed two 
divestitures related to subsidiaries of IBM Japan. The impact of 
these transactions was not material to the Consolidated Financial 
Statements. 
2010
On March 31, 2010, the company completed the sale of its activities 
associated with the sales and support of Dassault Systemes’ (Das-
sault) product lifecycle management (PLM) software, including 
customer contracts and related assets to Dassault. The company 
received net proceeds of $459 million and recognized a net gain 
of $591 million on the transaction in the first quarter of 2010. The 
gain was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain 
transaction costs and the assets and liabilities sold. The gain was 
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State-
ment of Earnings and the net proceeds were reflected in proceeds 
from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 
within cash flow from investing activities in the Consolidated State-
ment of Cash Flows. 


===== PAGE 93 =====
92
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
92
Note D.  
Financial Instruments
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at 
December 31, 2012 and 2011. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit
$      —
$3,694
$—
$3,694
Commercial paper
—
2,098
—
2,098
Money market funds
1,923
—
—
1,923
Other securities
—
30
—
30
Total
1,923
5,823
—
7,746(6)
Debt securities—current (2)
—
717
—
717(6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3)
2
8
—
10
Available-for-sale equity investments (3)
34
—
—
34
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts
—
604
—
604
Foreign exchange contracts
—
305
—
305
Equity contracts
—
9
—
9
Total
—
918
—
918 (7)
Total assets
$1,959
$7,466
$—
$9,424 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts
$      —
$   496
$—
$   496
Equity contracts
—
7
—
7
Total liabilities
$      —
$   503
$—
$   503 (7)
(1)	 Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	Commercial paper and certificates of deposit reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(3)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments in sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position at December 31, 2012 are $333 million and $585 million, respectively. 
(5)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31, 2012 are $426 million and $78 million, respectively. 
(6)	Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
(7)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability 
positions would have been reduced by $262 million each.


===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
93
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit*
$      —
$1,931 
$—
$1,931
Commercial paper *
—
777
—
777
Money market funds
1,886
—
—
1,886
U.S. government securities
—
2,750
—
2,750
Canada government securities*
—
983
—
983
Other securities
—
8
—
8
Total
1,886
6,449
—
8,335(5)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2)
1
7
—
8
Available-for-sale equity investments (2)
69
14
—
83
Derivative assets (3)
Interest rate contracts
—
783
—
783
Foreign exchange contracts
—
510
—
510
Equity contracts
—
7
—
7
Total
—
1,300
—
1,300 (6)
Total assets
$1,956 
$7,770 
$—
$9,726 (6)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (4)
Foreign exchange contracts
$      —
$   523 
$—
$   523
Equity contracts
—
8
—
     8
Total liabilities
$      —
$   531 
$—
$   531 (6)
  *	Represents a change from the 2011 Annual Report to reflect Canada government securities of $983 million previously reported in Commercial paper, and a reduction of $151 
million in Time deposits and certificates of deposit due to certain holdings which were out of the scope of this disclosure. 
(1)	 Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(3)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position at December 31, 2011 are $546 million and $754 million, respectively. 
(4)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31, 2011 are $365 million and $166 million, respectively.
(5)	Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(6)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability 
positions would have been reduced by $324 million each. 
There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the years ended 
December 31, 2012 and 2011. 
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value
Short-Term Receivables and Payables
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are 
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt 
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt) are financial liabili-
ties with carrying values that approximate fair value. If measured 
at fair value in the financial statements, these financial instruments 
would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarcy.
Loans and Long-Term Receivables
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using cur-
rent interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar 
credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31, 
2012 and 2011, the difference between the carrying amount and 
estimated fair value for loans and long-term receivables was 
immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements, 
these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the 
fair value hierarcy. 
Long-Term Debt
Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted 
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in 
an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted 
market price is not available, an expected present value technique 
that uses rates currently available to the company for debt with 
similar terms and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair value. 
The carrying amount of long-term debt is $24,088 million and 
$22,857 million and the estimated fair value is $27,119 million and 
$27,383 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. If mea-
sured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term debt 
(including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the 
fair value hierarcy.


===== PAGE 95 =====
94
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
94
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, 
2012, the company believes that unrealized losses on debt and 
available-for-sale equity securities are temporary and do not repre-
sent an other-than-temporary impairment.
	
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity securities were as 
follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Proceeds
$112 
$405
$16
Gross realized gains (before taxes)
45
232
6
Gross realized losses (before taxes)
(1)
(0)
(0)
The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale debt 
and equity securities that have been included in other comprehen-
sive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/losses reclassified 
from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) to net income 
were as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
Net unrealized gains/(losses)  
arising during the period
$ 17
$    (7)
Net unrealized (gains)/losses  
reclassified to net income*      
(25)
(143)
* Includes writedowns of $2.0 million and $0.3 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. 
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale debt 
securities were less than one year at December 31 , 2012.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is 
a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the 
normal course of business, the company is exposed to the impact 
of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to a 
lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and client 
credit risk. The company limits these risks by following established 
risk management policies and procedures, including the use of 
derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt in the 
currencies in which assets are denominated. For interest rate expo-
sures, derivatives are used to better align rate movements between 
the interest rates associated with the company’s lease and other 
financial assets and the interest rates associated with its financing 
debt. Derivatives are also used to manage the related cost of debt. 
For foreign currency exposures, derivatives are used to better 
manage the cash flow volatility arising from foreign exchange rate 
fluctuations.
	
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is 
exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts will 
fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the counter-
party credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering into 
contracts with carefully selected major financial institutions based 
upon their overall credit profile. The company’s established policies 
and procedures for mitigating credit risk on principal transactions 
include reviewing and establishing limits for credit exposure and 
continually assessing the creditworthiness of counterparties. The 
right of set-off that exists under certain of these arrangements 
enables the legal entities of the company subject to the arrange-
ment to net amounts due to and from the counterparty reducing 
the maximum loss from credit risk in the event of counterparty default. 
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value, which is not materially 
different from carrying value, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent 
debt and marketable equity securities which are also considered available-for-sale and re­cord­ed at fair value in the Consolidated Statement 
of Finan­cial Position.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Adjusted 
Cost
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
$  8
$2
$—
$10
Available-for-sale equity investments (1)
$31
$4 
$ (1 )
$34
(1)	 Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Adjusted 
Cost
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
$  7
$  1
$—
$  8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1)
$58
$27 
$ (2 )
$83
(1)	 Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 


===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
95
	
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements 
with most of its major counterparties. These arrangements require 
the company to hold or post collateral (cash or U.S. Treasury securi-
ties) when the derivative fair values exceed contractually established 
thresholds. Posting thresholds can be fixed or can vary based on 
credit default swap pricing or credit ratings received from the major 
credit agencies. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instru-
ments under these collateralized arrangements that were in a 
liability position at December 31, 2012 and 2011 was $94 million and 
$131 million, respectively, for which no collateral was posted at 
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011. Full collateralization 
of these agreements would be required in the event that the com-
pany’s credit rating falls below investment grade or if its credit 
default swap spread exceeds 250 basis points, as applicable, 
pursuant to the terms of the collateral security arrangements. The 
aggregate fair value of derivative instruments in net asset posi-
tions as of December 31, 2012 and 2011 was $918 million and 
$1,300 million, respectively. This amount represents the maximum 
exposure to loss at the reporting date as a result of the counter­
parties failing to perform as contracted. This exposure was 
reduced by $262 million and $324 million at December 31, 2012 
and 2011, respectively, of liabilities included in master netting 
arrangements with those counterparties. Additionally, at December 
31, 2012 and 2011, this exposure was reduced by $69 million and 
$466 million of cash collateral, respectively, received by the com-
pany. In addition to cash collateral, the company held $31 million in 
non-cash collateral, in U.S. Treasury securities at December 31, 
2012. Per accounting guidance, non-cash collateral is not recorded 
on the Statement of Financial Position. 
	
The company does not offset derivative assets against liabilities 
in master netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or 
payables recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral 
against the fair values of the related derivative instruments. No 
amount was recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2012 
and December 31, 2011 for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The 
amount recognized in accounts payable for the obligation to return 
cash collateral totaled $69 million and $466 million at December 
31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The company restricts the use of 
cash collateral received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports 
it in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position. No amount was rehypothecated at 
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011. 
	
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the 
volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency 
exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company 
with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as 
net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as the 
derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon maturity 
which is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the under-
lying hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss potential 
on an ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these hedging 
relationships by de-designating the derivative instrument in order to 
manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated as accounting 
hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset the changes 
in the fair value of the de-designated instruments from the date of 
de-designation until maturity.
	
In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts, 
futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency swaps, 
depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a 
party to leveraged derivative instruments. 
	
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized 
by underlying risk, follows.
Interest Rate Risk
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally 
to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-effec-
tive financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the 
underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce 
overall interest cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to con-
vert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e., 
fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt issu-
ances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At December 
31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional amount of the company’s inter-
est rate swaps was $4.3 billion and $5.9 billion, respectively. The 
weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments at 
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011 was approximately 5.1 
years and 5.5 years, respectively. 
Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt 
issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest 
payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps 
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have 
any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding at 
December 31, 2012 and 2011.
	
At December 31, 2012 and 2011, net gains of approximately 
$1 million and net losses of approximately $5 million (before taxes), 
respectively, were recorded in AOCI in connection with cash flow 
hedges of the company’s borrowings. Within these amounts less 
than $1 million of gains and $6 million of losses, respectively, are 
expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 months, 
providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying 
transactions.
Foreign Exchange Risk
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries  
(Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated debt 
portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign sub-
sidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused by 
changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional cur-
rency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. dollar. 
The company also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign 
exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional amount of derivative 
instruments designated as net investment hedges was $3.3 billion 
and $5.0 billion, respectively. The weighted-average remaining 
maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2012 and 2011 was 
approximately 0.4 years for both periods.


===== PAGE 97 =====
96
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
96
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional cur-
rency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments for 
royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S. 
subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation of these 
foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the cur-
rency markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange 
forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward con-
tracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length 
of time over which the company is hedging its exposure to the vari-
ability in future cash flows is four years. At December 31, 2012 and 
2011, the total notional amount of forward contracts designated as 
cash flow hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was 
$10.7 billion and $10.9 billion, respectively, with a weighted-average 
remaining maturity of 0.7 years at both year-end dates.
	
At December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, in connection 
with cash flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, 
the company recorded net losses of $138 million and net gains of 
$88 million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. Within these 
amounts $79 million of losses and $191 million of gains, respectively, 
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 
months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the under-
lying anticipated transactions.
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign cur-
rency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company employs 
cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign currency denom-
inated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in the functional currency 
of the borrowing entity. These swaps are accounted for as cash flow 
hedges. The maximum length of time over which the company 
hedges its exposure to the variability in future cash flows is approxi-
mately three years. At December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, 
no instruments relating to this program were outstanding. 
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency  
Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the cash 
of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency swaps to 
convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addition, the com-
pany uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically 
hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a portion of 
the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and liabilities. The 
terms of these forward and swap contracts are generally less than 
one year. The changes in the fair values of these contracts and of 
the underlying hedged exposures are generally offsetting and are 
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State-
ment of Earnings. At December 31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional 
amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign 
currency exposure was $12.9 billion and $13.6 billion, respectively.
Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad 
market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to 
certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of 
these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A 
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not 
designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives, 
including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the 
exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. The 
derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market 
indices or the total return on the company’s common stock. They 
are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported 
in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
At December 31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional amount of deriva-
tive instruments in economic hedges of these compensation 
obligations was $1.2 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively.
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common 
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed 
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settlement 
provisions. The company records the changes in the fair value of 
these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any warrants 
qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2012 and 2011.
	
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay 
amounts due under contractual terms. The company utilizes credit 
default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. These 
derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are recorded 
at fair value with gains and losses reported in other (income) and 
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company 
did not have any derivative instruments relating to this program out-
standing at December 31, 2012 and 2011.


===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
97
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the derivative and non-derivative instrument related risk management activity as of 
December 31, 2012 and 2011 as well as for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets
Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
At December 31:
Balance 
Sheet 
Classification
2012
2011
Balance 
Sheet 
Classification
2012
2011
Designated as hedging instruments
Interest rate contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets 
$  47
$     50
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
$      —
$      —
Investments and 
sundry assets
557
733
Other liabilities
—
—
Foreign exchange contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets
   135
407
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
267
273
Investments and 
sundry assets
5
—
Other 
liabilities
78
155
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$744
$1,190 
Fair value of 
derivative liabilities
$   345
$   428
Not designated as hedging instruments
Foreign exchange contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets 
$142
$     82
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
$   152
$     84
Investments and 
sundry assets
23
21
Other 
liabilities
—
11
Equity contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets
9
7
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
7
8
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$174
$   110
Fair value of 
derivative liabilities
$   159
$   103
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt
N/A
N/A
$   578
$      —
Long-term debt
N/A
N/A
3,035
1,884
Total
$918
$1,300 
$4,116 
$2,415 
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 99 =====
98
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
98
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings 
Line Item
Recognized on Derivatives(1)
Attributable to Risk Being Hedged(2)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges
Interest rate contracts
Cost of financing
$   65
$271
$241
$  59
$(117)
$  (70)
Interest expense
  55
205
160
50
(89)
(46)
Derivative instruments not designated  
as hedging instruments (1)
Foreign exchange contracts
Other (income) 
and expense
(311)
352
299
N/A
N/A
N/A
Equity contracts
SG&A expense
110
42
105
N/A
N/A
N/A
Warrants
Other (income) 
and expense
—
10
—
N/A
N/A
N/A
Total
$  (81)
$880
$805
$108
$(206)
$(116)
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Effective Portion Recognized in OCI
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings 
Line Item
Effective Portion 
Reclassified from AOCI
Ineffectiveness and Amounts 
Excluded from Effectiveness Testing(3)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
Derivative instruments in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts
$  —
$   —
$   —
Interest expense
$   (6)
$    (8)
$    (8)
$ —
$  —
$ —
Foreign exchange contracts
32
(266)
371
Other (income) 
and expense
237
(247)
(54)
3
(3)
(4)
Cost of sales
7
(182)
(92)
—
—
—
SG&A expense
16
(74)
(49)
—
—
—
Instruments in net investment hedges(4)
 
Foreign exchange contracts
(26)
45
178
Interest expense
—
0
0
11
(9)
(3)
Total
$   6
$(221)
$549
$253
$(511)
$(203)
$14
$(12)
$ (7)
(1)	 The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under 
these derivative contracts.
(2)	The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated 
hedging relationships during the period.
(3)	The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4)	Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
N/A—Not applicable
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, there 
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings represent-
ing hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment of 
hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with an 
underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to occur (for 
cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal course 
of business.
	
Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 83 for 
additional information on the company’s use of derivative financial 
instruments.
Note E.  
Inventories
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Finished goods
$   475
$   589
Work in process and raw materials
1,812
2,007
Total
$2,287
$2,595


===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
99
Note F.  
Financing Receivables
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allowances 
for credit losses, including residual values.
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Current
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
$  3,862
$  3,765
Commercial financing receivables
7,750
7,095
Client loan receivables
5,395
5,195
Installment payment receivables
1,031
846
Total
$18,038
$16,901 
Noncurrent
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
$  6,107
$  5,406
Commercial financing receivables
5
34
Client loan receivables
5,966
4,925
Installment payment receivables
733
410
Total
$12,812
$10,776 
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates 
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms 
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales-type 
and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual values 
of $794 million and $745 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, 
respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of $728 million 
and $733 million, and net of the allowance for credit losses of $114 
million and $118 million at those dates, respectively. Scheduled 
maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding at December 31, 
2012, expressed as a percentage of the total, are approximately: 
2013, 42 percent; 2014, 29 percent; 2015, 18 percent; 2016, 9 percent; 
and 2017 and beyond, 3 percent.
	
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit 
losses of $46 million and $53 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, 
respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts receivable 
financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and non-IBM products. 
Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable financing 
generally range from 30 to 90 days.
	
Client loan receivables, net of allowance for credit losses of $155 
million and $126 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, 
are loans that are provided primarily to clients to finance the pur-
chase of software and services. Separate contractual relationships 
on these financing arrangements are for terms ranging generally 
from one to seven years. 
	
Installment payment receivables, net of allowance for credit 
losses of $39 million and $51 million at December 31, 2012 and 
2011, respectively, are loans that are provided primarily to clients 
to finance hardware, software and services ranging generally from 
one to three years.
	
Client loan receivables and installment payment receivables 
financing contracts are priced independently at competitive market 
rates. The company has a history of enforcing the terms of these 
separate financing agreements.
	
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as col-
lateral for non-recourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged 
as collateral for borrowings were $650 million and $410 million at 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These borrowings are 
included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 104 and 105.
	
The company did not have any financing receivables held for 
sale as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. 
Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
The following tables present financing receivables on a gross basis, 
excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual value, by port-
folio segment and by class, excluding current commercial financing 
receivables and other miscellaneous current financing receivables 
at December 31, 2012 and 2011. The company determines its allow-
ance for credit losses based on two portfolio segments: lease 
receivables and loan receivables, and further segments the portfolio 
into two classes: major markets and growth markets. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables
$  7,036
$2,138
$  9,174
Loan receivables
9,666
3,670
13,336
Ending balance
$16,701
$5,808
$22,510
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$16,570
$5,684
$22,254
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     131
$   125
$     256
Allowance for credit losses:
Beginning balance at  
January 1, 2012
Lease receivables
$       79
$     40
$     118
Loan receivables
125
64
189
Total
$     203
$   104
$     307
Write-offs
(14)
(1)
(15)
Provision
(9)
38
28
Other
0
(2)
(2)
Ending balance at  
December 31, 2012
$     180
$   138
$     318
Lease receivables
$       59
$     55
$     114
Loan receivables
$     121
$     84
$     204
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$       69
$     29
$       98
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     111
$   109
$     220


===== PAGE 101 =====
100
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
100
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables
$  6,510
$1,921
$  8,430
Loan receivables
9,077
2,552
11,629
Ending balance
$15,587
$4,472
$20,060
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$15,321
$4,370
$19,692
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     266
$   102
$     368
Allowance for credit losses:
Beginning balance at  
January 1, 2011
Lease receivables
$       84
$     42
$     126
Loan receivables
150
76
226
Total
$     234
$   119
$     353
Write-offs
(68)
(16)
(84)
Provision
39
5
44
Other
(1)
(4)
(5)
Ending balance at  
December 31, 2011
$     203
$   104
$     307
Lease receivables
$       79
$     40
$     118
Loan receivables
$     125
$     64
$     189
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$       82
$     15
$       96
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     122
$     89
$     211
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evalu-
ated either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually 
evaluated receivables, the company determines the expected cash 
flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential 
loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss 
is probable, the company records a specific reserve. In addition, the 
company records an unallocated reserve that is calculated by apply-
ing a reserve rate to its different portfolios, excluding accounts that 
have been specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon 
credit rating, probability of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan) 
and loss history.
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing 
receivables which were on non-accrual status at December 31, 2012 
and 2011. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Major markets
$  27
$  46
Growth markets
21
20
Total lease receivables
$  47
$  66 
Major markets
$  67
$  75 
Growth markets
25
24
Total loan receivables
$  92
$  99 
Total receivables
$139
$165 
Impaired Loans
The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated 
reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment, 
loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following 
tables present impaired client loan receivables at December 31, 2012 
and 2011. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Recorded 
Investment
Related 
Allowance
Major markets
$  88
$  77
Growth markets
72
65
Total
$160
$143
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Recorded 
Investment
Related 
Allowance
Major markets
$110
$  70
Growth markets
62
53
Total
$172
$123
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2012:
Average 
Recorded 
Investment
Interest 
Income 
Recognized
Interest 
Income 
Recognized 
on Cash 
Basis
Major markets
$  90
$0
$0
Growth markets
65
0
0
Total
$156
$0
$0
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2011:
Average 
Recorded 
Investment
Interest 
Income 
Recognized
Interest 
Income 
Recognized 
on Cash 
Basis
Major markets
$142
$2
$0
Growth markets
90
0 
0
Total
$232
$3
$0
Credit Quality Indicators
The company’s credit quality indicators are based on rating agency 
data, publicly available information and information provided by 
customers, and are reviewed periodically based on the relative 
level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating system 
that maps to Moody’s Investors Service credit ratings as shown 
on the following page. Moody’s does not provide credit ratings to 
the company on its customers.
 	
The tables present the gross recorded investment for each class 
of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 2012 and 
2011. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging from Aaa to 
Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others are considered 
non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do not reflect 
mitigation actions that the company may take to transfer credit risk 
to third parties.


===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
101
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$   646
$     86
A1 – A3
1,664
223
Baa1 – Baa3
2,285
776
Ba1 – Ba2
1,367
450
Ba3 – B1
552
418
B2 – B3
399
127
Caa – D
124
58
Total
$7,036
$2,138
Loan Receivables 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$   887
$   148
A1 – A3
2,286
382
Baa1 – Baa3
3,139
1,333
Ba1 – Ba2
1,878
773
Ba3 – B1
758
718
B2 – B3
548
218
Caa – D
170
99
Total
$9,666
$3,670
At December 31, 2012, the industries which made up Global Financing’s 
receivables portfolio consist of: Financial (38 percent), Government 
(16 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Retail (9 percent), Services 
(7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Communications (6 percent) and 
Other (4 percent). 
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$   697
$   139
A1 – A3
1,459
306
Baa1 – Baa3
2,334
654
Ba1 – Ba2
1,118
457
Ba3 – B1
534
252
B2 – B3
260
97
Caa – D
108
15
Total
$6,510 
$1,921 
Loan Receivables 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$   971
$   185
A1 – A3
2,034
407
Baa1 – Baa3
3,255
869
Ba1 – Ba2
1,559
607
Ba3 – B1
744
335
B2 – B3
362
129
Caa – D
151
20
Total
$9,077
$2,552 
At December 31, 2011, the industries which made up Global Financing’s 
receivables portfolio consist of: Financial (39 percent), Government 
(15 percent), Manufacturing (13 percent), Retail (9 percent), Services 
(7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Communications (6 percent) and 
Other (5 percent). 
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Total 
Past Due 
> 90 Days*
Current
Total 
Financing 
Receivables
Recorded 
Investment 
> 90 Days 
and Accruing
Major markets
$  8 
$  7,028
$  7,036
$  5 
Growth markets
11
2,127
2,138
8
Total lease receivables
$20 
$  9,154
$  9,174
$13 
Major markets
$27 
$  9,639
$  9,666
$  8
Growth markets
36
3,634
3,670
31
Total loan receivables
$63 
$13,273
$13,336
$39 
Total
$82
$22,428
$22,510
$52
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved. 


===== PAGE 103 =====
102
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
102
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Total 
Past Due 
> 90 Days*
Current
Total 
Financing 
Receivables
Recorded 
Investment 
> 90 Days 
and Accruing
Major markets
$  6 
$  6,504
$  6,510
$  6
Growth markets
9 
1,911
1,921
6
Total lease receivables
$16
$  8,415
$  8,430
$12 
Major markets
$23
$  9,054
$  9,077
$  7
Growth markets
22
2,530
2,552
19
Total loan receivables
$46
$11,584
$11,629
$26
Total
$62
$19,998
$20,060
$38
*	 Does not include accounts that are fully reserved. 
Troubled Debt Restructurings
The company assessed all restructurings that occurred on or after 
January 1, 2011 and determined that there were no troubled debt 
restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2012.
Note G.  
Property, Plant and Equipment
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Land and land improvements
$     747
$     786
Buildings and building improvements
9,610
9,531
Plant, laboratory and office equipment
27,731
26,843
Plant and other property—gross
38,088
37,160
Less: Accumulated depreciation
25,234
24,703
Plant and other property—net
12,854
12,457
Rental machines
2,414
2,964
Less: Accumulated depreciation
1,271
1,538
Rental machines—net
1,142
1,426
Total—net
$13,996
$13,883 
Note H.  
Investments and Sundry Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Deferred transition and setup costs  
and other deferred arrangements*
$1,630
$1,784
Derivatives—noncurrent **
585
753
Alliance investments
Equity method
120
131
Non-equity method
226
127
Prepaid software
306
233
Long-term deposits
318
307
Other receivables
204
208
Employee benefit-related
439
   493 
Prepaid income taxes
459
261
Other assets
735
598
Total
$5,021
$4,895 
  * Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related to 
Global Services client arrangements. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” 
on page 79 for additional information. 
** See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 94 through 98 for the fair value of all 
derivatives reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Note I.  
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
Intangible Assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset balances 
by major asset class.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,527
$   (665)
$   861
Client relationships
2,103
(961)
1,142
Completed technology
2,709
(1,112)
1,597
In-process R&D
28
—
28
Patents/trademarks
281
(127)
154
Other*
31
(27)
3
Total
$6,679
$(2,892)
$3,787


===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
103
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,478 
$   (678)
$   799
Client relationships
1,751
(715)
1,035
Completed technology
2,160
(746)
1,414
In-process R&D
18
—
18
Patents/trademarks
207
(88)
119
Other*
29
(22)
7
Total
$5,642 
$(2,250)
$3,392 
*	 Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business 
processes, methodologies and systems.
The net carrying amount of intangible assets increased $395 million 
during the year ended December 31, 2012, primarily due to intangible 
asset additions resulting from acquisitions, partially offset by amor-
tization. There was no impairment of intangible assets recorded in 
2012 and 2011.
	
Total amortization was $1,284 million and $1,226 million for the 
years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The aggre-
gate amortization expense for acquired intangibles assets (excluding 
capitalized software) was $709 million and $634 million for the years 
ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. In addition, in 2012 
the company retired $641 million of fully amortized intangible assets, 
impacting both the gross carrying amount and accumulated amor-
tization by this amount. 
	
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years 
relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at 
December 31, 2012:
($ in millions)
Capitalized 
Software
Acquired 
Intangibles
Total
2013
$501
$729
$1,230
2014
277
626
903
2015
83
498
581
2016
—
458
458
2017
—
340
340
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2012
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase 
Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments
Balance 
December 31, 
2012
Global Business Services
$  4,313 
$       5
$  (0)
$  (2)
$  42
$  4,357
Global Technology Services
2,646
264
—
(0)
6
2,916
Software
18,121
2,182
(30)
(6)
137
20,405
Systems and Technology
1,133
443
(0)
(14)
6
1,568
Total
$26,213
$2,894
$(30)
$(22)
$192
$29,247
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2011
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase 
Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments
Balance 
December 31, 
2011
Global Business Services
$  4,329
$     14
$  (0)
$(10)
$  (20)
$  4,313
Global Technology Services
2,704
—
(1)
(2)
(55)
2,646
Software
16,963
1,277
10
(2)
(127)
18,121
Systems and Technology
1,139
—
(6)
—
(0)
1,133
Total
$25,136 
$1,291 
$  2
$(13)
$(203 )
$26,213 
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2012 and 2011 were related to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to December 31, 2011 
or December 31, 2010, respectively, and were still subject to the measurement period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition 
date or when information becomes available. There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded in 2012 or 2011, and the company has no 
accumulated goodwill impairment losses.


===== PAGE 105 =====
104
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
104
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31:
Maturities
2012
2011
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2012):
2.79%
2013 – 2014
$  7,131
$  8,615
1.46%
2015 – 2016
  5,807
  2,414
5.29%
2017 –2021
7,457
8,600
1.88%
2022
1,000
500
7.00%
2025
600
600
6.22%
2027
469
469
6.50%
2028
313
313
5.875%
2032
600
600
8.00%
2038
83
187
5.60%
2039
745
1,545
4.00%
2042
1,107
—
7.00%
2045
27
27
7.125%
2096
316
322
25,656
24,192
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2012, in parentheses):
Euros (3.6%)
2013 – 2019
2,338
1,037
Japanese yen (0.7%)
2013 – 2014
878
1,123
Swiss francs (3.8%)
2015 – 2020
178
173
Canadian (2.2%)
2017
502
—
Other (4.6%)
2013 – 2017
107
177
29,660
26,702
Less: net unamortized discount
865
533
Add: fair value adjustment*
886
994
29,680
27,161
Less: current maturities
5,593
4,306
Total
$24,088
$22,857 
* The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the debt’s 
carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates. 
Note J.  
Borrowings
Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Commercial paper
$1,800
$2,300 
Short-term loans
1,789
1,859
Long-term debt—current maturities
5,593
4,306
Total
$9,181
$8,463 
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at Decem-
ber 31, 2012 and 2011 was 0.1 percent, respectively. The weighted- 
average interest rates for short-term loans was 1.8 percent and 1.2 
percent at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. 


===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
105
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt outstand-
ing at December 31, 2012, are as follows: 
($ in millions)
Total
2013
$  5,561
2014
3,791
2015
2,677
2016
3,058
2017
4,531
2018 and beyond
10,042
Total
$29,660
Debt Exchange
In the second quarter of 2012, the company completed an exchange 
of approximately $6 million of principal of its 7.125 percent deben-
tures due 2096, $104 million of principal of its 8.00 percent notes 
due in 2038 and $800 million of principal of its 5.600 percent senior 
notes due in 2039 for approximately $1,107 million of 4.00 percent 
senior notes due in 2042 and cash of approximately $121 million. 
The exchange was completed to retire high coupon debt in the cur-
rent favorable interest rate environment.
	
The debt exchange was accounted for as a non-revolving debt 
modification in accordance with accounting guidance, and therefore 
it did not result in any gain or loss recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. Cash payments will be amortized over the 
life of the new debt. Administrative fees with third parties in relation 
to the exchange were expensed as incurred.
Interest on Debt
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Cost of financing
$   545 
$553
$555
Interest expense
470
402
365
Net investment derivative activity 
(11)
9
3
Interest capitalized
18
9
5
Total interest paid and accrued
$1,022 
$973 
$928 
Refer to the related discussion on page 136 in note T, “Seg­ment 
Infor­mation,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing 
segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 92 to 98 
for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps in 
the company’s debt risk management program. 
Lines of Credit
In 2011, the company renewed its five-year, $10 billion Credit Agree-
ment (the “Credit Agreement”), which expires on November 10, 
2016. In 2012, the company extended the term of the global credit 
facility by one year to November 10, 2017. The total expense 
recorded by the company related to this facility was $5.3 million in 
2012, $5.0 million in 2011 and $6.2 million in 2010. The Credit Agree-
ment permits the company and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow 
up to $10 billion on a revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary 
Borrowers will be unconditionally backed by the company. The com-
pany may also, upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of 
the additional banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement, 
increase the commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an 
additional $2.0 billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit Agree-
ment, the company and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow, prepay 
and reborrow amounts under the Credit Agreement at any time 
during the Credit Agreement. Interest rates on borrowings under the 
Credit Agreement will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as 
further described in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement 
contains customary representations and warranties, covenants, 
events of default, and indemnification provisions. The company 
believes that circumstances that might give rise to breach of these 
covenants or an event of default, as specified in the Credit Agreement, 
are remote. As of December 31, 2012, there were no borrowings by 
the company, or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Agreement.
	
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some 
of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Inter-
est rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit 
vary from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
(in millions)
2012
2011
For the year ended December 31:
Amount
Average Rate
Amount
Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt 
$24,049
3.43%
$18,547
4.38%
Floating-rate debt* 
5,631
1.91%
8,614
1.54%
Total
$29,680
$27,161
* Includes $4,252 million in 2012 and $5,898 million in 2011 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert the fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D, 
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 92 to 98.) 


===== PAGE 107 =====
106
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
106
Note K.  
Other Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Income tax reserves
$2,527
$3,989 
Executive compensation accruals
1,542
1,388
Disability benefits
890
835
Derivative liabilities
78
166
Special actions
430
347
Workforce reductions
473
366
Deferred taxes
448
549
Environmental accruals
216
249
Noncurrent warranty accruals
167
163
Asset retirement obligations
127
166
Other
709
777
Total
$7,607
$8,996 
In response to changing business needs, the company periodically 
takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, cost 
competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent contractually 
obligated future payments associated with these activities are 
reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the previous table.
	
In addition, the company executed certain special actions 
as follows: (1) the second quarter of 2005 associated with Global 
Services, primarily in Europe, (2) the fourth quarter of 2002 associ-
ated with the acquisition of the PricewaterhouseCoopers consulting 
business, (3) the second quarter of 2002 associated with the 
Microelectronics Division and the rebalancing of the company’s 
workforce and leased space resources, (4) the 2002 actions associ-
ated with the hard disk drive business for reductions in workforce, 
manufacturing capacity and space, (5) the actions taken in 1999, 
and (6) the actions that were executed prior to 1994.
The table below provides a roll forward of the current and noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. The current liabilities 
presented in the table are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(in millions)
Liability 
as of 
January 1, 
2012
Payments
Other 
Adjustments*
Liability 
as of 
December 31, 
2012
Current
Workforce
$  33
$(32)
$27
$  28
Space
4
(4)
1
2
Total current
$  38
$(36)
$28
$  30
Noncurrent
Workforce
$344 
$  —
$85
$430 
Space
3
—
(3)
0
Total noncurrent
$347 
$  —
$83
$430 
* The other adjustments column in the table above principally includes the reclassification of noncurrent to current, remeasurement of actuarial assumptions, foreign currency 
translation adjustments and interest accretion.
The workforce accruals primarily relate to terminated employees 
who are no longer working for the company who were granted 
annual payments to supplement their incomes in certain countries. 
Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements, these 
required payments will continue until the former employee begins 
receiving pension benefits or passes away. The space accruals are 
for ongoing obligations to pay rent for vacant space that could not 
be sublet or space that was sublet at rates lower than the committed 
lease arrangement. The length of these obligations varies by lease 
with the longest extending through 2014.
	
The company employs extensive internal environmental protec-
tion programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company 
also participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at a 
number of locations, including operating facilities, previously owned 
facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum exposure 
for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts 
have been recorded for non-ARO environmental liabilities that are 
not probable or estimable. The total amounts accrued for non-ARO 
environmental liabilities, including amounts classified as current in 
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect 
actual or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $229 million and 
$262 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Estimated 
environmental costs are not expected to materially affect the con-
solidated financial position or consolidated results of the company’s 
operations in future periods. However, estimates of future costs are 
subject to change due to protracted cleanup periods and changing 
environmental remediation regulations.
	
As of December 31, 2012, the company was unable to estimate the 
range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for certain 
asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are primarily 
related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is not subject to 
abatement unless the buildings are demolished and non-encapsulated 
asbestos that the company would remediate only if it performed major 
renovations of certain existing buildings. Because these conditional 


===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
107
obligations have indeterminate settlement dates, the company could 
not develop a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company 
will continue to assess its ability to estimate fair values at each future 
reporting date. The related liability will be recognized once sufficient 
additional information becomes available. The total amounts accrued 
for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified as current in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, were $171 million and 
$187 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Note L.  
Equity Activity
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which 
1,117,367,676 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2012 and 
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par 
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2012. 
Stock Repurchases
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM 
common stock. The company repurchased 61,246,371 common 
shares at a cost of $12,008 million, 88,683,716 common shares at 
a cost of $15,034 million and 117,721,650 common shares at a cost 
of $15,419 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. These 
amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of 
each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may 
differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions. At 
December 31, 2012, $8,652 million of Board common stock repur-
chase authorization was still available. The company plans to 
purchase shares on the open market or in private transactions from 
time to time, depending on market conditions.
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part 
of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock pur-
chase plan: 15,091,320 shares in 2012, 20,669,785 shares in 2011 
and 34,783,386 shares in 2010.The company issued 2,746,169 
treasury shares in 2012, 4,920,198 treasury shares in 2011 and 
7,929,318 treasury shares in 2010, as a result of exercises of stock 
options by employees of certain acquired businesses and by non-
U.S. employees. Also, as part of the company’s stock-based 
compensation plans, 2,406,007 common shares at a cost of $468 
million, 1,717,246 common shares at a cost of $289 million and 
2,334,932 common shares at a cost of $297 million in 2012, 2011 
and 2010, respectively, were remitted by employees to the company 
in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding requirements. 
These amounts are included in the treasury stock balance in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and the Consolidated 
Statement of Changes in Equity.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2012:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$     (44)
$     10
$     (34)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$        8
$      (4)
$        4
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
(42)
17
(25)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
20
(8)
12
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$     (14)
$       5
$       (9)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$      32
$    (27)
$        5
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales
(7)
(6)
(13)
SG&A expense
(16)
4
(12)
Other (income) and expense
(237)
91
(146)
Interest expense
6
(3)
3
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$   (220)
$     59
$   (161)
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
$(7,489)
$2,327
$(5,162)
Curtailments and settlements
(2)
0
(2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(148)
59
(89)
Amortization of net gains/(losses)
2,457
(874)
1,583
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$(5,182)
$1,513
$(3,669)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$(5,460)
$1,587
$(3,874)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional information.)


===== PAGE 109 =====
108
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
108
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2011:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$   (693)
$    (18)
$   (711)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$     (14)
$       5
$       (9)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
(231)
88
(143)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
4
(1)
3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$   (241)
$     91
$   (150)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$  (266) 
$   105
$   (162)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales
182
(61)
121
SG&A expense
75
(23)
52
Other (income) and expense
247
(3)
244
Interest expense
8
(95)
(88)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$    245
$    (77)
$    167
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Prior service costs/(credits)
$     (28)
$       7
$     (22)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(5,463)
1,897
(3,566)
Curtailments and settlements
11
(3)
7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(157)
62
(94)
Amortization of net gains/(losses)
1,847
(619)
1,227
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$(3,790)
$1,343
$(2,448)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$(4,479)
$1,339
$(3,142)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional information.)


===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
109
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2010:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$    712
$    (69)
$    643
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$      70
$    (24)
$      46
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
0
(0)
(0)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
8
(3)
5
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$      78
$    (27)
$      51
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$    371
$  (120)
$    251
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales
92
(32)
60
SG&A expense
49
(17)
33
Other (income) and expense
54
(17)
37
Interest expense
8
(3)
5
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$    573
$  (188)
$    385
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Prior service costs/(credits)
$      28
$      (8)
$      20
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(2,728)
1,016
(1,712)
Curtailments and settlements
10
(3)
7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(183)
67
(116)
Amortization of net gains/(losses)
1,249
(441)
808
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$(1,624)
$   632
$   (992)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$   (260)
$   348
$      87
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional information.)


===== PAGE 111 =====
110
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
110
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Unrealized 
Gains/(Losses) 
on Cash Flow 
Hedges
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
Adjustments*
Net Change 
Retirement- 
Related 
Benefit 
Plans
Net Unrealized 
Gains/(Losses) 
on Available- 
For-Sale 
Securities
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2009
$(481)
$1,836 
$(20,297)
$ 113 
$(18,830)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
251
643
(1,684)
51
(739)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
134
0
692
0
826
Total change for the period
385
643
(992)
51
87
December 31, 2010
(96)
2,478
(21,289)
164
(18,743)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
(162)
(711)
(3,581)
(7)
(4,461)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
329
0
1,133
(143)
1,319
Total change for the period
167
(711)
(2,448)
(150)
(3,142)
December 31, 2011
71
1,767
(23,737)
13
(21,885)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
5
(34)
(5,164)
16
(5,177)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(167)
0
1,495
(25)
1,303
Total change for the period
(161)
(34)
(3,669)
(9)
(3,874)
December 31, 2012
$  (90)
$1,733
$(27,406)
$     4 
$(25,759)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax. 
Note M.  
Contingencies and Commitments
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with 
clients in more than 170 countries, IBM is involved, either as plaintiff 
or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, inves-
tigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time to time 
in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a leader in 
the information technology industry and, as such, has been and will 
continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP rights and associ-
ated products and offerings, including claims of copyright and patent 
infringement and violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In 
addition, the company enforces its own IP against infringement, 
through license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical 
for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to 
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide 
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related to 
contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and 
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and other 
benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, product 
liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law and environ-
mental matters. These actions may be commenced by a number of 
different parties, including competitors, clients, current or former 
employees, government and regulatory agencies, stockholders and 
representatives of the locations in which the company does busi-
ness. Some of the actions to which the company is party may involve 
particularly complex technical issues, and some actions may raise 
novel questions under the laws of the various jurisdictions in which 
these matters arise.
	
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, 
investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has 
been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably esti-
mated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such 
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 
were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the com-
pany provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of 
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the com-
pany also discloses matters based on its consideration of other 
matters and qualitative factors, including the experience of other 
companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee 
relations considerations.
	
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and 
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time 
that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for example, 
the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the com-
pany’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remaining 
claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this note, 
the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible 
losses or range of losses, including losses in excess of amounts 
accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations 
and proceedings are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to 
predict the ultimate outcome of these matters. It is the company’s 
experience that damage amounts claimed in litigation against it are 
unreliable and unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not 
meaningful indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, the 
company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number of 
other factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations and 
proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status of 


===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
111
the matter in question, the presence of complex or novel legal theo-
ries, and/or the ongoing discovery and development of information 
important to the matters. The company reviews claims, suits, inves-
tigations and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions are made 
with respect to recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing 
reasonably possible losses or range of losses (individually or in the 
aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement discus-
sions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews by 
counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter.
	
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in 
any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a 
material effect on the company’s business, financial condition, 
results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of vari-
ables, including: the timing and amount of such losses or damages; 
the structure and type of any such remedies; the significance of 
the impact any such losses, damages or remedies may have in the 
Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts and cir-
cumstances of the particular matter that may give rise to additional 
factors. While the company will continue to defend itself vigorously, 
it is possible that the company’s business, financial condition, results 
of operations or cash flows could be affected in any particular period 
by the resolution of one or more of these matters.
	
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters 
involving the company.
	
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 
in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM). 
The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff 
is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP rights, 
and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition, interference 
with contract and breach of contract with regard to the company’s 
distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of code to Linux. The 
company has asserted counterclaims, including breach of contract, 
violation of the Lanham Act, unfair competition, intentional torts, 
unfair and deceptive trade practices, breach of the General Public 
License that governs open source distributions, promissory estop-
pel and copyright infringement. Motions for summary judgment were 
heard in March 2007, and the court has not yet issued its decision. 
On September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, and 
all proceedings in this case were stayed. On August 25, 2009, the 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware approved the 
appointment of a Trustee of SCO. The court in another suit, the SCO 
Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010. The jury found 
that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare copyrights; the judge 
subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated to recognize Novell’s 
waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and Sequent for breach of UNIX 
license agreements. On August 30, 2011, the Tenth Circuit Court of 
Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling and denied SCO’s appeal 
of this matter. In November 2011, SCO filed a motion in Federal Court 
in Utah seeking to reopen the SCO v. IBM case.
	
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf 
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued one 
another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the moderniza-
tion of social service program processing in Indiana. The State 
terminated the contract, claiming that IBM was in breach, and the 
State is seeking damages. IBM believes the State’s claims against 
it are without merit and is seeking payment of termination amounts 
specified in the contract. Trial began in late February 2012 in Marion 
County, Indiana Superior Court and concluded in early April. On July 
18, 2012, the court rejected the State’s claims in their entirety and 
awarded IBM $52 million plus interest and costs. In August 2012, the 
State of Indiana filed a notice of appeal. IBM also intends to appeal 
certain portions of the court’s ruling.
	
The company was named as a co-defendant in numerous pur-
ported class actions filed on and after March 18, 2011 in federal and 
state courts in California in connection with an information technol-
ogy outsourcing agreement between Health Net, Inc. and IBM. The 
matters were consolidated in the United States District Court for the 
Eastern District of California, and plaintiffs filed a consolidated com-
plaint on July 15, 2011. The consolidated complaint alleges that the 
company violated the California Confidentiality of Medical Informa-
tion Act in connection with hard drives that are unaccounted for at 
one of Health Net’s data centers in California; plaintiffs have been 
notified by Health Net that certain of their personal information is 
believed to be contained on those hard drives. Plaintiffs seek dam-
ages, as well as injunctive and declaratory relief. IBM has also 
received a request for information regarding this matter from the 
California Attorney General. On January 12, 2012, the court granted 
IBM’s motion to dismiss the complaint for lack of standing, and on 
February 22, 2012, the case against IBM was dismissed.
	
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal proceedings 
in May 2010 before the High Court in London against the IBM UK 
Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative beneficiaries 
of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a declaration that 
it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the UK Trust that it 
was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future accruals for most 
participants and in implementing the company’s new retirement 
policy. The trial in the High Court began in February 2013. In addi-
tion, IBM UK is a defendant in approximately 290 individual actions 
brought since early 2010 by participants of the defined benefits 
plans who left IBM UK. These actions, which allege constructive 
dismissal and age discrimination, are pending before the Employ-
ment Tribunal in Southampton UK and are currently stayed pending 
resolution of the above-referenced High Court proceedings.


===== PAGE 113 =====
112
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
112
	
In a separate but related proceeding, in March 2011, the Trustee 
of the IBM UK Trust was granted leave to initiate a claim before the 
High Court in London against IBM UK and one member of the UK 
Trust membership, seeking an order modifying certain documents 
and terms relating to retirement provisions in IBM UK’s largest 
defined benefit plan (the C Plan) dating back to 1983. The trial of 
these proceedings began in May 2012 and finished in early June. 
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued its ruling, 
holding that the 1983 Trust Deeds and Rules should be modified to 
allow certain categories of current IBM UK employees who are 
members of the C Plan to retire from the age of 60 (rather than from 
the age of 63) without actuarial reduction of their defined benefit 
pension. In a supplementary ruling on December 13, 2012, the Court 
declined to similarly modify the Trust Deeds and Rules for former 
employees who were C Plan members and who left the company 
prior to retirement. On February 7, 2013, the Court issued an order 
agreed to by all parties, under which there will be no appeals of the 
October 2012 and December 2012 judgments. As a result of the 
October 2012 ruling, IBM recorded an additional pre-tax retirement-
related obligation of $162 million in the third quarter of 2012.
	
In March 2011, the company announced that it has agreed to 
settle a civil enforcement action with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) relating to activities by employees of IBM Korea, 
LG IBM, IBM (China) Investment Company Limited and IBM Global 
Services (China) Co., Ltd., during the period from 1998 through 
2009, allegedly in violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 
1977. As part of the settlement, IBM has consented to the entry of 
a judgment relating to the books and records and internal control 
provisions of the securities laws. IBM has also agreed to pay a total 
of $10 million, categorized by the SEC as follows: (i) $5.3 million, 
representing profits gained as a result of the conduct alleged in the 
SEC’s complaint, (ii) prejudgment interest on that amount of $2.7 
million, and (iii) a civil penalty of $2 million. The settlement is subject 
to court approval.
	
The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after 
January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York, 
county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The com-
plaints allege numerous and different causes of action, including for 
negligence and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass. Plain-
tiffs in these cases seek medical monitoring and claim damages in 
unspecified amounts for a variety of personal injuries and property 
damages allegedly arising out of the presence of groundwater con-
tamination and vapor intrusion of groundwater contaminants into 
certain structures in which plaintiffs reside or resided, or conducted 
business, allegedly resulting from the release of chemicals into the 
environment by the company at its former manufacturing and devel-
opment facility in Endicott. These complaints also seek punitive 
damages in an unspecified amount.
	
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings 
brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and 
Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to 
CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to 
participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership 
of sites. The company is also conducting environmental investiga-
tions, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity of several 
current or former operating sites globally pursuant to permits, 
administrative orders or agreements with country, state or local 
environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and claims con-
cerning certain current or former operating sites.
	
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and 
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with many 
other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company is 
involved in various challenges with Brazilian authorities regarding 
non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litigation matters. 
These matters include claims for taxes on the importation of com-
puter software. In November 2008, the company won a significant 
case in the Superior Chamber of the federal administrative tax court 
in Brazil, and in late July 2009, the company received written con-
firmation regarding this decision. The total potential amount related 
to the remaining matters for all applicable years is approximately 
$575 million. The company believes it will prevail on these matters 
and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability. 


===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
113
Note N.  
Taxes
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Income before income taxes
U.S. operations
$  9,668
$  9,716
$  9,140
Non-U.S. operations
12,234
11,287 
10,583 
Total income before income taxes
$21,902 
$21,003 
$19,723 
The provision for income taxes by geographic operations is as 
follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
U.S. operations
$2,582
$2,141 
$2,000 
Non-U.S. operations
2,716
3,007
2,890
Total provision for income taxes
$5,298
$5,148 
$4,890 
The components of the provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdic-
tion are as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
U.S. federal
Current
$1,361
$   268
$   190
Deferred
403
909
1,015
1,764
1,177
1,205
U.S. state and local
Current
134
429
279
Deferred
289
81
210
423
510
489
Non-U.S.
Current
3,006
3,239
3,127
Deferred
105
222
69
3,111
3,461
3,196
Total provision for income taxes
5,298
5,148
4,890
Provision for social security,  
real estate, personal property  
and other taxes
4,331
4,289
4,018
Total taxes included in net income
$9,629
$9,437 
$8,908 
Commitments
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities 
include unused amounts of $4,719 million and $4,040 million at 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. A portion of these amounts 
was available to the company’s business partners to support their 
working capital needs. In addition, the company has committed 
to provide future financing to its clients in connection with client 
purchase agreements for approximately $1,513 million and $1,866 
million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
	
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor 
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of 
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a 
description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
	
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to 
which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect 
to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the context of 
contracts entered into by the company, under which the company 
customarily agrees to hold the other party harmless against losses 
arising from a breach of representations and covenants related 
to such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP rights, specified 
environmental matters, third-party performance of nonfinancial 
contractual obligations and certain income taxes. In each of these 
circumstances, payment by the company is conditioned on the other 
party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in 
the particular contract, the procedures of which typically allow the 
company to challenge the other party’s claims. While typically 
indemnification provisions do not include a contractual maximum 
on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these 
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of claim, 
and in some instances, the company may have recourse against 
third parties for certain payments made by the company.
	
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of 
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the con-
ditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique facts 
and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Histori-
cally, payments made by the company under these agreements 
have not had a material effect on the company’s business, financial 
condition or results of operations.
	
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial 
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these 
financial guarantees was $65 million and $56 million at December 
31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The fair value of the guarantees 
recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is 
not material.


===== PAGE 115 =====
114
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
114
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
Leases
$2,216
$2,149 
Depreciation
1,378
1,421
Goodwill and intangible assets
957
796
Software development costs
542
466
Retirement benefits
257
551
Other
1,158
1,121
Gross deferred tax liabilities
$6,508
$6,504 
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and 
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $706 million, 
as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $929 million. 
Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least two 
years or are available for 10 years or more.
	
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2012 principally applies 
to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards that, in the 
opinion of management, are more likely than not to expire unutilized. 
However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these carry­
forwards are realized in the future, the reduction in the valuation 
allowance will reduce income tax expense.
	
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2012 
increased by $97 million in 2012 to $5,672 million. A reconciliation of 
the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is 
as follows:
($ in millions)
2012
2011
2010
Balance at January 1
$5,575
$5,293 
$ 4,790 
Additions based on tax positions 
related to the current year
401
672
1,054
Additions for tax positions  
of prior years
215
379
1,768
Reductions for tax positions  
of prior years (including impacts 
due to a lapse in statute)
(425)
(538)
(1,659)
Settlements
(94)
(231)
(660)
Balance at December 31
$5,672
$5,575 
$ 5,293 
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current 
and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain 
tax incentives and credits, acquisition-related matters and state 
issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized tax benefits 
for tax positions of prior years are primarily attributable to the con-
clusion of the company’s various U.S., state and non-U.S. income 
tax examinations and various non-U.S. matters, as well as impacts 
due to lapses in statutes of limitation.
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the company’s 
effective tax rate is as follows: 
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Statutory rate
35%
35%
35%
Foreign tax differential
(11)
(10)
(10)
State and local
1
2
2
Other
(1)
(2)
(2)
Effective rate
24%
25%
25%
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconcili-
ation above labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects of 
foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. 
statutory rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax impacts of 
non-U.S. earnings repatriation and any net impacts of intercom-
pany transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements or 
changes in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated 
with each of these items.
	
In the fourth quarter of 2011, the IRS commenced its audit of the 
company’s U.S. tax returns for the years 2008 through 2010. The 
company anticipates that this audit will be completed by the end 
of 2013.
	
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities 
did not have a material impact on the company’s effective tax rate.
	
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities 
that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
were as follows: 
Deferred Tax Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011*
Retirement benefits
$  5,870
$  5,169
Share-based and other compensation
1,666
1,598
Deferred income
1,018
834
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards
954
914
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards
681
752
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves
586
608
Depreciation
456
474
Other
1,384
1,479
Gross deferred tax assets
12,615
11,828
Less: valuation allowance
1,187
912
Net deferred tax assets
$11,428
$10,916 
* Reclassed to conform with 2012 presentation.


===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
115
	
In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of a non-
U.S. taxing authority with respect to certain foreign tax losses. The 
tax benefit of these losses, approximately $1,475 million, had been 
included in unrecognized tax benefits within 2010 additions for tax 
positions of prior years. The tax benefit of these losses total $1,386 
million as of December 31, 2012. The 2012 decrease was driven by 
currency and has been included in the 2012 reductions for tax posi-
tions of prior years. In April 2011, the company had received 
notification that the appeal was denied. In June 2011, the company 
filed a lawsuit challenging this decision. The next court hearing is 
scheduled for March 2013. No final determination has been reached 
on this matter.
	
The liability at December 31, 2012 of $5,672 million can be 
reduced by $573 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with the 
correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, state 
income taxes and timing adjustments. The net amount of $5,099 
million, if recognized, would favorably affect the company’s effective 
tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2011 and 2010 were 
$5,090 million and $4,849 million, respectively.
	
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are included 
in income tax expense. During the year ended December 31, 2012, 
the company recognized $134 million in interest expense and penalties; 
in 2011, the company recognized $129 million in interest expense and 
penalties, and in 2010, the company recognized a $15 million ben-
efit in interest expense and penalties. The company has $533 million 
for the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31, 
2012, and had $461 million accrued at December 31, 2011.
	
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably 
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits associ-
ated with certain positions may be significantly reduced. The 
potential decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is 
primarily associated with the anticipated resolution of the com-
pany’s U.S. income tax audit for 2008 through 2010, as well as 
various non-U.S. audits. Specific positions that may be resolved, 
and may reduce the amount of unrecognized tax benefits, include 
transfer pricing matters, tax incentives and credits as well as vari-
ous other foreign tax matters. The company estimates that the 
unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2012 could be reduced 
by approximately $1,700 million. 
	
With limited exception, the company is no longer subject to U.S. 
federal, state and local or non-U.S. income tax audits by taxing 
authorities for years through 2007. The years subsequent to 2007 
contain matters that could be subject to differing interpretations of 
applicable tax laws and regulations related to the amount and/or 
timing of income, deductions and tax credits. Although the outcome 
of tax audits is always uncertain, the company believes that ade-
quate amounts of tax and interest have been provided for any 
adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
	
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $44.4 billion 
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31, 
2012, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these earn-
ings in non-U.S. operations. However, the company periodically 
repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that it does not 
incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the deferred tax 
liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings is not 
practicable.
Note O.  
Research, Development  
and Engineering
RD&E expense was $6,302 million in 2012, $6,258 million in 2011 
and $6,026 million in 2010.
	
The company incurred expense of $6,034 million, $5,990 million 
and $5,720 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, for scientific 
research and the application of scientific advances to the develop-
ment of new and improved products and their uses, as well as 
services and their application. Within these amounts, software-
related expense was $3,078 million, $3,097 million and $3,028 
million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. 
	
Expense for product-related engineering was $268 million, 
$267 million and $306 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively.


===== PAGE 117 =====
116
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
116
Note P.  
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based
Basic
1,142,508,521
1,196,951,006
1,268,789,202
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans
10,868,426
14,241,131
16,189,053
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares
2,072,370
2,575,848
2,377,133
Assuming dilution
1,155,449,317
1,213,767,985
1,287,355,388
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated
$16,604
$15,855 
$14,833 
Less—net income applicable to contingently issuable shares
(1)
0
0
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated
$16,603
$15,855 
$14,833 
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$  14.37
$  13.06
$  11.52
Basic
$  14.53
$  13.25
$  11.69
There were no stock options outstanding in 2012, 2011 and 2010 that were considered antidilutive and not included in the diluted earnings 
per share calculation.
Note Q.  
Rental Expense and  
Lease Commitments
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and fixed 
assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was $1,767 mil-
lion in 2012, $1,836 million in 2011 and $1,727 million in 2010. Rental 
expense in agreements with rent holidays and scheduled rent 
increases is recorded on a straight-line basis over the lease term. 
Contingent rentals are included in the determination of rental 
expense as accruable. The table below depicts gross minimum 
rental commitments under noncancelable leases, amounts related 
to vacant space associated with infrastructure reductions and spe-
cial actions taken through 1994, and in 1999, 2002 and 2005 
(previously reserved), sublease income commitments and capital 
lease commitments. These amounts reflect activities primarily related 
to office space, as well as manufacturing facilities.
($ in millions)
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Beyond 2017
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments  
(including vacant space below)
$1,466
$1,268
$1,044
$746
$535
$747
Vacant space
$     21
$     13
$       7
$    3
$    1
$    0
Sublease income commitments
$     26
$     16
$     11
$    9
$    4
$    1
Capital lease commitments
$     13
$     12
$     11
$    8
$  10
$    6


===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
117
Note R.  
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based 
on the fair value of the award, and is recognized over the employee 
requisite service period. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” 
on page 82 for additional information.
	
The following table presents total stock-based compensation 
cost included in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Cost
$ 132
$ 120
$   94
Selling, general and administrative
498
514
488
Research, development  
and engineering
59
62
48
Other (income) and expense
(1)
— 
(1)
Pre-tax stock-based  
compensation cost
688
697
629
Income tax benefits
(240)
(246)
(240)
Total stock-based  
compensation cost
$ 448
$ 450
$ 389
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested 
awards at December 31, 2012 and 2011 was $1,101 million and $1,169 
million, respectively, and is expected to be recognized over a 
weighted-average period of approximately three years.
	
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensation 
cost at December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010.
Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under 
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the 
“Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen­
sation and Management Resources Com­mittee of the Board of 
Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans prin-
cipally include stock options, restricted stock units, performance 
share units or any combination thereof.
	
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under 
the company’s existing Plans was 274.1 million at December 31, 2012. 
In addition, certain incentive awards granted under previous plans, 
if and when those awards were canceled, could be reissued under 
the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million additional 
awards were considered authorized to be issued under the com-
pany’s existing Plans as of December 31, 2012. There were 121.2 
million unused shares available to be granted under the Plans as 
of December 31, 2012.
	
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all 
awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards 
approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, the 
number of options or the value of the award, the exercise price or 
formula for determining the exercise price and the date of grant. All 
awards for senior management are approved by the Committee. All 
awards for employees other than senior management are approved 
by senior management pursuant to a series of delegations that were 
approved by the Committee, and the grants made pursuant to these 
delegations are reviewed periodically with the Committee. Awards 
that are given as part of annual total compensation for senior man-
agement and other employees are made on specific cycle dates 
scheduled in advance. With respect to awards given in connection 
with promotions or new hires, the company’s policy requires approval 
of such awards prior to the grant date, which is typically the date of 
the promotion or the date of hire.
Stock Options
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase 
shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are 
granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high 
and low stock price on the date of grant. These awards, which 
generally vest 25 percent per year, are fully vested four years from 
the date of grant and have a contractual term of 10 years.
	
The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the date 
of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and 
assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options include 
the grant price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of 
the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend 
yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict actual 
future events or the value ultimately realized by employees who 
receive equity awards, and subsequent events are not indicative 
of the reasonableness of the original estimates of fair value made 
by the company.
	
During the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the 
company did not grant stock options.


===== PAGE 119 =====
118
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
118
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010.
2012
2011
2010
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Balance at January 1
$  90
20,662,322
$  94
39,197,728
$  98 
73,210,457
Options exercised
86
(9,080,170)
98
(18,144,309)
101
(33,078,316)
Options canceled/expired 
75
(192,431)
107
(391,097)
108
(934,413)
Balance at December 31
$  94
11,389,721
$  90
20,662,322
$  94
39,197,728
Exercisable at December 31
$  94
11,389,721
$  90
20,662,322
$  94
39,197,728
The shares under option at December 31, 2012 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Exercise Price Range
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value
Weighted-Average 
Remaining 
Contractual Life 
(in Years)
$85 and under
$  83
3,222,177
$   350,989,003
0.9
$86 – $105
97
7,532,868
709,980,689
1.9
$106 and over
106
634,676
54,314,359
1.1
$  94
11,389,721
$1,115,284,051
1.6
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was an 
additional 0.9 million stock-based awards, consisting of stock 
options and restricted stock units, outstanding at December 31, 
2012, as a result of the company’s assumption of stock-based 
awards previously granted by the acquired entities. The weighted-
average exercise price of these awards was $68 per share.
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended 
December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $1,005 million, $1,269 million 
and $1,072 million, respectively. The total cash received from 
employees as a result of employee stock option exercises for the 
years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was approximately 
$785 million, $1,786 million and $3,347 million, respectively. In con-
nection with these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the 
company for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 
were $341 million, $412 million and $351 million, respectively.
	
The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily 
with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with treasury 
shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2012 and 2011 were 
approximately 1,080 million and 1,019 million shares, respectively.


===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
119
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the holder 
to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically over a 
one- to five-year period. For RSUs awarded on or after January 1, 
2008, dividend equivalents are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs 
is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s 
stock price adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents.
	
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at 
December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 is the same as the period over 
which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, which 
is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted during 
the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $486 mil-
lion, $803 million and $421 million, respectively. The total fair value 
of RSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31, 
2012, 2011 and 2010 was $509 million, $373 million and $503 mil-
lion, respectively. As of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, there 
was $938 million, $1,021 million and $865 million, respectively, of 
unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The 
company received no cash from employees as a result of employee 
vesting and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31, 
2012, 2011 and 2010. In the second quarter of 2011, the company 
granted equity awards valued at approximately $1 thousand each 
to about 400,000 non-executive employees. These awards were 
made under the Plans and vest in December 2015. 
	
PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately 
received by the employee depends on the company’s performance 
against specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period. 
For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not paid. The fair value of each 
PSU is determined on the grant date, based on the company’s stock 
price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents, and 
assumes that performance targets will be achieved. Over the per-
formance period, the number of shares of stock that will be issued 
is adjusted upward or downward based upon the probability of 
achievement of performance targets. The ultimate number of shares 
issued and the related compensation cost recognized as expense 
will be based on a comparison of the final performance metrics to 
the specified targets. The fair value of PSUs granted at target during 
the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $186 
million, $165 million and $145 million, respectively. Total fair value of 
PSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31, 
2012, 2011 and 2010 was $203 million, $141 million and $153 million, 
respectively.
	
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, 
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended 
December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 were $454 million, $283 million 
and $293 million, respectively. 
Stock Awards
In lieu of stock options, the company currently grants its employees stock awards. These awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock 
Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or Performance Share Units (PSUs). 
	
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010.
RSUs
2012
2011
2010
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$129 
12,218,601
$110 
11,196,446
$102 
13,405,654
RSUs granted
184
2,635,772
154
5,196,802
122
3,459,303
RSUs released
117
(4,338,787)
106
(3,508,700)
98
(5,102,951)
RSUs canceled/forfeited
139
(674,125)
122
(665,947)
105
(565,560)
Balance at December 31
$148
9,841,461
$129 
12,218,601
$110 
11,196,446
PSUs
2012
2011
2010
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$122
3,686,991
$111 
3,649,288
$107 
3,476,737
PSUs granted at target
185
1,004,003
154
1,055,687
117
1,239,468
Additional shares earned above target*
102
550,399
118
230,524
103
463,913
PSUs released
102
(1,998,746)
118
(1,189,765)
103
(1,486,484)
PSUs canceled/forfeited
131
(70,446)
118
(58,743)
108
(44,346)
Balance at December 31**
$151
3,172,201
$122 
3,686,991
$111 
3,649,288
  * Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued depends on the company’s 
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.


===== PAGE 121 =====
120
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
120
	
Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using 
benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first method 
uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines benefits based 
on salary, years of service, mortality and other participant-specific 
factors. The second method is a cash balance formula that calcu-
lates benefits using a percentage of employees’ annual salary, as 
well as an interest crediting rate.
	
Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased 
December 31, 2007 for all participants. 
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental 
Executive Reten­tion Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan, 
which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives 
based on average earnings, years of service and age at termination of 
employment.
	
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 31, 
2007 for all participants. 
Defined Contribution Plans
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan 
U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to 
participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined-
contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible 
employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions up 
to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those hired prior to January 
1, 2005, and up to 5 percent of eligible compensation for those hired 
on or after January 1, 2005. In addition, eligible employees receive 
automatic contributions from the company equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent 
of eligible compensation based on their eligibility to participate in 
the PPP as of December 31, 2007. Employees receive automatic 
contributions and matching contributions after the completion of 
one year of service. Further, through June 30, 2009, IBM contributed 
transition credits to eligible participants’ 401(k) Plus Plan accounts. 
The amount of the transition credits was based on a participant’s 
age and service as of June 30, 1999. 
	
The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and 
participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All 
contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and 
invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections. 
There are no minimum amounts that must be invested in company 
stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts out of 
company stock to another investment choice, other than excessive 
trading rules applicable to such investments. Effective January 1, 
2013, matching and automatic contributions are made once annually 
at the end of the year. In order to receive such contributions each year, 
a participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year. 
However, if a participant separates from service prior to December 
15, and has completed certain service and/or age requirements, 
then the participant will be eligible to receive such matching and 
automatic contributions following separation from service.
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock 
Pur­chase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants to 
purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a 5 per-
cent discount off the average market price on the day of purchase 
through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible compensa-
tion. Eligible compensation includes any compensation received by 
the employee during the year. The ESPP provides for offering peri-
ods during which shares may be purchased and continues as long 
as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier 
at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP partici-
pants are restricted from purchasing more than $25,000 of common 
stock in one calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period. 
	
Employees purchased 1.6 million, 1.9 million and 2.4 million 
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 2012, 
2011 and 2010, respectively. Cash dividends declared and paid by 
the company on its common stock also include cash dividends on 
the company stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are 
paid on full and fractional shares and can be reinvested in the ESPP. 
The company stock purchased through the ESPP is considered out-
standing and is included in the weighted-average outstanding shares 
for purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share.
	
Approximately 3.8 million, 5.4 million and 7.2 million shares were 
available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2012, 2011 
and 2010, respectively. 
Note S.  
Retirement-Related Benefits
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution 
plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a supplemental 
retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives and nonpension 
postretirement benefit plans primarily consisting of retiree medical 
and dental benefits for eligible retirees and dependents. 
U.S. Plans
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
IBM Personal Pension Plan 
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired 
prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pen-
sion benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008, the 
IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qualified) 
plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective January 
1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess Personal 
Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is now referred 
to as the Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now referred to as 
the PPP. The Qualified PPP is funded by company contributions 
to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of 
participants and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded, 
provides benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans.


===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
121
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Exec­utive 
Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, defined 
contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess 
401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution plan. 
Employees who are eligible to participate in the 401(k) Plus Plan and 
whose eligible compensation is expected to exceed the IRS com-
pensation limit for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the 
Excess 401(k). The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide ben-
efits that would be provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan 
if the compensation limits did not apply.
	
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping 
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. 
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts 
in investments which mirror the primary investment options available 
under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess 401(k) are also 
eligible to receive company match and automatic contributions on 
eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and on com-
pensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code pay limit 
once they have completed one year of service. Through June 30, 
2009, eligible participants also received transition credits. Amounts 
deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company contributions 
are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. Effective January 1, 2013, matching and automatic contri-
butions are made once annually at the end of the year. In order to 
receive such contributions each year, a participant must be 
employed on December 15 of the plan year. However, if a participant 
separates from service prior to December 15, and has completed 
certain service and/or age requirements, then the participant will 
be eligible to receive such matching and automatic contributions 
following separation from service. 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan 
The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretire-
ment benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to 
eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insurance 
for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company estab-
lished a Future Health Account (FHA) for employees who were more 
than five years from retirement eligibility. Employees who were within 
five years of retirement eligibility are covered under the company’s 
prior retiree health benefits arrangements. Under either the FHA or 
the prior retiree health benefit arrangements, there is a maximum 
cost to the company for retiree health benefits. 
	
Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are not 
eligible for company subsidized nonpension postretirement benefits.
Non-U.S. Plans
Most subsidiaries and branches outside the United States sponsor 
defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover sub-
stantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds under 
various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities under 
group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. Benefits 
under the defined benefit plans are typically based either on years 
of service and the employee’s compensation (generally during a 
fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or on annual 
credits. The range of assumptions that are used for the non-U.S. 
defined benefit plans reflect the different economic environments 
within the various countries.
	
In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries spon-
sor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide medical 
and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible depen-
dents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S. retirees. 
However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local government-
sponsored and -administered programs.


===== PAGE 123 =====
122
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
122
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. 
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
Total
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
Defined benefit pension plans
$(526)
$(774)
$(949)
$1,040
$   734
$   541
$   515
$    (40)
$  (408)
Retention Plan
18
15
14
—
—
—
18
15
14
Total defined benefit  
pension plans (income)/cost
$(507)
$(759)
$(935)
$1,040
$   734
$   541
$   533
$    (25)
$  (394)
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan  
and Non-U.S. plans
$ 857
$ 875
$ 882
$   621
$   608
$   527
$1,478 
$1,483 
$1,409 
Excess 401(k)
29
30
20
—
—
—
29
30
20
Total defined contribution plans cost
$ 885
$ 905
$ 902
$   621
$   608
$   527
$1,506 
$1,513 
$1,430 
Nonpension postretirement  
benefit plans cost
$ 268
$ 269
$ 281
$     82
$     76
$     66
$   350
$   345
$   347
Total retirement-related  
benefits net periodic cost
$ 646
$ 415
$ 248
$1,743 
$1,418 
$1,134 
$2,389 
$1,832 
$1,382 
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement benefit 
plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations
Fair Value of Plan Assets
Funded Status*
At December 31:
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
U.S. Plans
Underfunded plans
Qualified PPP
$  54,907
$52,318
$53,630
$51,218
$   (1,277)
$   (1,100)
Excess PPP
1,576
1,462
—
—
(1,576)
(1,462)
Retention Plan
327
305
—
—
(327)
(305)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan
5,282
5,273
433
38
(4,849)
(5,235)
Total underfunded U.S. plans
$  62,092 
$59,358
$54,063 
$51,256
$  (8,029)
$  (8,102)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans 
Qualified defined benefit pension plans
$    6,944 
$13,169 
$  7,889 
$16,011 
$      945
$   2,843
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
12
7
12
7
0
0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans
$    6,956 
$13,175 
$  7,901 
$16,018 
$      945
$   2,843
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans
$  35,956 
$24,659 
$30,169 
$19,351 
$  (5,788)
$  (5,308)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans
6,418
5,033
—
—
(6,418)
(5,033)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
1,007 
894 
107 
105 
(900)
(789)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans
$  43,381 
$30,587 
$30,276 
$19,456 
$(13,106)
$(11,131)
Total overfunded plans
$    6,956 
$13,175 
$  7,901 
$16,018 
$      945
$   2,843
Total underfunded plans
$105,473 
$89,944 
$84,338 
$70,712 
$(21,134)
$(19,232)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation and 
benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2012, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 94 percent funded compared to the benefit 
obligations, with the U.S. qualified PPP 98 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualifed plans, the company’s defined benefit pension plans 
were 86 percent funded.


===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
123
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension  
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 125 represent financial information 
for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding defined 
contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans under U.S. 
Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP and the Reten-
tion Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the nonpension 
postretirement benefit plans under Non-U.S. Plans consists of all 
plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S. 
Non­pension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
	
The tables below present the components of net periodic (income)/
cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized in the Consoli­
dated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
Service cost
$      —
$       —
$       —
$    443
$    505
$    508
Interest cost
2,196
2,456
2,601
1,779
1,843
1,841
Expected return on plan assets
(4,043)
(4,043)
(4,017)
(2,303)
(2,521)
(2,461)
Amortization of transition assets
—
—
—
(0)
(0)
(0)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
10
10
10
(154)
(162)
(174)
Recognized actuarial losses
1,331
818
471
1,027
957
712
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
1
0
1
27
Multi-employer plans/other costs*
—
—
—
247
111
89
Total net periodic (income)/cost
$   (507)
$   (759)
$   (935)
$ 1,040
$    734
$    541
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
Service cost
$  36
$  33
$  33
$14 
$ 11
$  9
Interest cost
200
236
262
64
67
59
Expected return on plan assets
—
—
—
(9)
(10)
(9)
Amortization of transition assets
—
—
—
0
0
0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
—
—
(14)
(4)
(4)
(5)
Recognized actuarial losses
32
—
—
17
13
12
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
—
0
—
—
Total net periodic cost
$268 
$269 
$281 
$82 
$ 76 
$66
* The 2012 Non-U.S. plans amount includes $162 million related to the IBM UK pension litigation. See page 125 for additional information.


===== PAGE 125 =====
124
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
124
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding 
defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
Change in benefit obligation 
Benefit obligation at January 1
$54,085
$51,293 
$ 42,861
$42,584 
$ 5,273
$ 5,123
$   901
$ 872
Service cost
—
—
443
505
36
33
14
11
Interest cost
2,196
2,456
1,779
1,843
200
236
64
67
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
47
53
200
228
—
—
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
0
(0)
26
(48)
2
(0)
0
(1)
Actuarial losses/(gains)
3,810
3,551
6,365
812
104
244
76
47
Benefits paid from trust
(3,184)
(3,121)
(1,987)
(1,995)
(551)
(623)
(6)
(7)
Direct benefit payments
(97)
(95)
(454)
(462)
(35)
(32)
(27)
(27)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
77
(423)
—
—
(24)
(60)
Medicare/Government subsidies
—
—
—
—
53
65
—
—
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other
—
—
161
(8)
—
—
21
—
Benefit obligation at December 31
$56,810
$54,085 
$ 49,319
$42,861 
$ 5,282
$ 5,273
$1,019
$ 901
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1
$51,218
$50,259 
$ 35,362
$35,722 
$      38
$      35
$   112
$ 120
Actual return on plan assets
5,596
4,080
3,742
1,052
0
0
10
13
Employer contributions
—
—
557
728
746
397
1
0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
—
—
40
(27)
—
—
—
(0)
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
47
53
200
228
—
—
Benefits paid from trust
(3,184)
(3,121)
(1,987)
(1,995)
(551)
(623)
(6)
(7)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
305
(537)
—
—
(8)
(15)
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other
—
—
(8)
367*
—
—
10
—
Fair value of plan assets at December 31
$53,630
$51,218 
$ 38,058
$35,362 
$    433
$      38
$   119
$ 112
Funded status at December 31
$ (3,180)
$ (2,866)
$(11,261)
$ (7,499)
$(4,849)
$(5,235)
$  (900)
$(789)
Accumulated benefit obligation**
$56,810
$54,085 
$ 48,369
$42,063
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
  * Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to a 2011 government ruling allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM. Beginning June 
2011, the assets will be returned to IBM monthly over a three year period, with approximately $200 million returned during 2012. The remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31, 
2012 remains excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31:
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
Prepaid pension assets
$        0
$         0
$     944
$   2,843
$        0
$        0
$     0
$     0
Current liabilities—compensation and benefits
(102)
(96)
(356)
(304)
(239)
(437)
(20)
(22)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension 
postretirement benefit obligations
(3,078)
(2,770)
(11,849)
(10,038)
(4,610)
(4,798)
(880)
(768)
Funded status—net
$(3,180)
$(2,866)
$(11,261)
$  (7,499)
$(4,849)
$(5,235)
$(900)
$(789)


===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
125
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI and the 
changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the retirement-related 
benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
Net loss at January 1
$18,561
$15,865 
$18,309
$17,580 
$734
$492 
$211
$180 
Current period loss/(gain)
2,258
3,514
4,905
1,696
104
241
75
45
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
2
(11)
—
—
—
—
Amortization of net loss included  
in net periodic (income)/cost
(1,331)
(818)
(1,027)
(957)
(32)
—
(17)
(13)
Net loss at December 31
$19,488
$18,561 
$22,188
$18,309 
$806
$734 
$269
$211 
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1
$     139
$     149
$    (768)
$    (958)
$   —
$   —
$ (10)
$ (14)
Current period prior service costs/(credits)
—
—
—
28
—
—
(0)
(0)
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits  
included in net periodic (income)/cost
(10)
(10)
154
162
—
—
4
4
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31
$     130
$     139
$    (614)
$    (768)
$   —
$   —
$   (6)
$ (10)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1
$       —
$        —
$        (0)
$        (0)
$   —
$   —
$    0
$    1
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)  
included in net periodic (income)/cost
—
—
0
0
—
—
(0)
(0)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31
$        —
$        —
$        (0)
$        (0)
$   —
$   —
$    0
$    0
Total loss recognized in accumulated other 
comprehensive income/(loss)*
$19,618
$18,701 
$21,574
$17,541 
$806
$734
$263
$202 
* See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 107 to 110 for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net periodic 
(income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/ 
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2013.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit  
Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss
$1,804 
$1,693 
$33
$26
Prior service costs/(credits)
9
(132)
—
(4)
Transition (assets)/liabilities
0
(0)
—
0
During the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the 
company paid $22 million, $16 million and $22 million, respectively, 
for mandatory pension insolvency insurance coverage premiums 
in certain non-U.S. countries (Germany, Canada, Luxembourg and 
the UK).
	
No significant amendments of retirement-related benefit plans 
occurred during the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 that 
had a material effect in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
	
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued a ruling 
against IBM United Kingdom Limited and IBM United Kingdom 
Holdings Limited, both wholly-owned subsidiaries of the company, 
in litigation involving one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a 
result of the ruling, the company recorded an additional pre-tax 
retirement-related obligation of $162 million in the third quarter of 
2012 in selling, general and administrative expense in the Consoli-
dated Statement of Earnings. See note M, “Contingencies and 
Commitments,” on pages 111 and 112 for additional information.
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net 
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations 
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years 
of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of 
which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan 
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and 
mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a 
minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.


===== PAGE 127 =====
126
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
126
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for retirement-
related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net 
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate
4.20%
5.00%
5.60%
4.28%
4.33%
4.84%
Expected long-term returns  
on plan assets
8.00%
8.00%
8.00%
6.26%
6.41%
6.56%
Rate of compensation increase*
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.43%
2.37%
2.92%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure  
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate
3.60%
4.20%
5.00%
3.23%
4.28%
4.33%
Rate of compensation increase*
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.51%
2.43%
2.37%
* Rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all participants.
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2012
2011
2010
2012
2011
2010
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net 
periodic cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate
3.90%
4.80%
5.40%
7.37%
7.75%
7.92%
Expected long-term returns  
on plan assets
N/A
N/A
N/A
9.01%
9.07%
9.16%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure  
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate
3.30%
3.90%
4.80%
6.43%
7.37%
7.75%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related benefit 
plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, fixed 
income debt instruments at the measurement date. For the U.S. and 
certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate 
bonds is used to construct a yield curve. The cash flows from the 
company’s expected benefit obligation payments are then matched 
to the yield curve to derive the discount rates. In other non-U.S. 
countries, where the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are 
not generally as well developed, a portfolio of long-term govern-
ment bonds is used as a base, to which a credit spread is added 
to simulate corporate bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdic-
tion of each plan, as the benchmark for developing the respective 
discount rates.
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the 
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/cost 
and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions 
resulted in a decrease in 2012 net periodic income of $258 million, 
a decrease in 2011 net periodic income of $171 million and a 
decrease in 2010 net periodic income of $40 million. The changes 
in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase in the PBO 
of $3,414 million and $4,216 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, 
respectively. 
	
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the changes in 
the discount rate assumptions had no material impact on net peri-
odic cost for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 
and resulted in an increase in the APBO of $252 million and $359 
million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.


===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
127
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic 
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan 
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan assets. 
Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into account long-
term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and 
strategies as described on page 128. These rates of return are devel-
oped by the company and are tested for reasonableness against 
historical returns. The use of expected long-term returns on plan 
assets may result in recognized pension income that is greater or 
less than the actual returns of those plan assets in any given year. 
Over time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed 
to approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result in 
a pattern of income and cost recognition that more closely matches 
the pattern of the services provided by the employees. Differences 
between actual and expected returns are recognized as a compo-
nent of net loss or gain in AOCI, which is amortized as a component 
of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives or life expectancy 
of the plan participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts 
exceed certain thresholds provided by accounting standards. The 
market-related value of plan assets recognizes changes in the fair 
value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the 
expected return on plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost.
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the Qualified PPP, the 
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent 
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 
and 2010 and, consequently, had no incremental impact on net 
periodic (income)/cost.
	
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company 
maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely pay-
ments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 2012, 
2011 and 2010, the expected long-term return on plan assets and 
the actual return on those assets were not material.
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com­pany, 
based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate of 
compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit 
pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all 
participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on life expec-
tancy and death rates for different types of participants. Mortality 
rates are periodically updated based on actual experience.
Interest Crediting Rate
Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a 
cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an 
interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/
cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting 
the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the benefits 
that they are expected to receive in the following year and is based 
on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S. Treasury 
Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
	
For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.1 percent 
for the year ended December 31, 2012, from 1.3 percent for the year 
ended December 31, 2011, resulted in an increase in 2012 net periodic 
income of $10 million. The change in the interest crediting rate to 
1.3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2011, from 1.4 percent 
for the year ended December 31, 2010, resulted in an increase in 
2011 net periodic income of $4 million. The change in the interest 
crediting rate to 1.4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2010, 
from 2.8 percent for the year ended December 31, 2009, resulted in 
an increase in 2010 net periodic income of $62 million.
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the com-
pany reviews external data and its own historical trends for 
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. How-
ever, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect on 
plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan which 
limit the company’s obligation to the participants. The company 
assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2013 will be 7.0 per-
cent. In addition, the company assumes that the same trend rate will 
decrease to 5 percent over the next four years. A one percentage 
point increase or decrease in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate 
would not have had a material effect on 2012, 2011 and 2010 net 
periodic cost or the benefit obligations as of December 31, 2012 
and 2011.
Healthcare Legislation
The expected effects of the U.S. healthcare reform legislation 
enacted in March 2010 were incorporated into the remeasurements 
of the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan at December 31, 
2012 and 2011. The impact was insignificant as a result of the terms 
of the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants.
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and mea-
sured at fair value as described in note A, “Significant Accounting 
Policies,” on page 84. Because of the inherent uncertainty of 
valuations, these fair value measurements may not necessarily 
reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market 
transactions.


===== PAGE 129 =====
128
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
128
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are 
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its 
future obligations. The precise amount for which these obligations 
will be settled depends on future events, including the retirement 
dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. The obliga-
tions are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based on the 
current economic environment and other pertinent factors described 
on pages 125 to 127. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment strat-
egy balances the requirement to generate returns, using potentially 
higher yielding assets such as equity securities, with the need to 
control risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed 
income securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, volatility in 
equity values and changes in interest rates that could cause the plan 
to become underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on 
contributions from the company. To mitigate any potential concen-
tration risk, careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio 
among industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into 
account interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, 
currency and other factors that affect investment returns. As a result, 
the Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 43 percent equity 
securities, 47 percent fixed income securities, 5 percent real estate 
and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent with the alloca-
tion decisions made by the company’s management and is similar 
to the prior year target allocation. The table on page 129 details the 
actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other types of invest-
ments in the Qualified PPP portfolio. 
	
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and 
investment professionals who are employees of the company. They are 
bound by investment mandates determined by the company’s man-
agement and are measured against specific benchmarks. Among 
these managers, consideration is given, but not limited to, balancing 
security concentration, issuer concentration, investment style and 
reliance on particular active and passive investment strategies. 
	
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $6,946 million 
of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private market assets 
consisting of private equities and private real estate investments, 
which are less liquid than publicly traded securities. As of December 
31, 2012, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,509 million in commit-
ments for future investments in private markets to be made over a 
number of years. These commitments are expected to be funded 
from plan assets.
	
Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment 
objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management 
strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are fixed 
income management, including duration, interest rate management 
and credit exposure, cash equitization and to manage currency and 
commodity strategies.
	
Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those 
described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted-average 
target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 35 percent equity securi-
ties, 54 percent fixed income securities, 2 percent real estate and 
9 percent other investments, which is consistent with the allocation 
decisions made by the company’s management. The table on page 
129 details the actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other 
types of investments for non-U.S. plans. In some countries, a higher 
percentage allocation to fixed income is required to manage sol-
vency and funding risks. In others, the responsibility for managing 
the investments typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 
percent of members elected by employees and retirees. This can 
result in slight differences compared with the strategies previously 
described. Generally, these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid 
assets and their use of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan 
and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management, 
credit exposure and alternative investment strategies.
	
The company’s defined benefit pension plans include invest-
ments in certain European government securities. At December 
31, 2012, the U.S. plan held $847 million and the non-U.S. plans 
held approximately $11 billion in European sovereign debt invest-
ments, primarily in AAA-rated securities. Investments in government 
debt securities in Italy, Spain and Ireland were de minimis in the U.S. 
plan and represented less than 1 percent of total non-U.S. plan 
assets. The plans hold no direct investments in government debt 
securities of Greece and Portugal.
	
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are 
underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company maintains 
a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely benefit 
payments. 


===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
129
Defined Benefit Pension Plan assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2012. 
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (a)
$15,161
$         1
$      —
$15,163
$6,395
$       —
$      —
$  6,395
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c)
96
2,556
—
2,652
138
7,641
—
7,779
Fixed income
Government and related (d)
—
12,945
6
12,951
—
8,978
76
9,054
Corporate bonds (e)
—
8,499
11
8,510
—
1,878
5
1,883
Mortgage and asset-backed securities
—
922
45
968
—
9
—
9
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f)
155
804
267
1,226
78
8,018
—
8,096
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
1,019
—
1,019
Cash and short-term investments (g)
244
3,198
—
3,442
134
373
—
507
Hedge funds
—
1,402
756
2,159
—
646
—
646
Private equity (h)
—
—
4,085
4,085
—
—
353
353
Private real estate (h)
—
—
2,861
2,861
—
—
609
609
Derivatives (i)
(6)
62
—
56
0
856
—
857
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j)
—
—
—
—
12
907
—
919
Subtotal
15,650
30,390
8,032
54,072
6,757
30,325
1,042
38,124
Other (k)
—
—
—
(442)
—
—
—
(66)
Fair value of plan assets
$15,650
$30,390
$8,032
$53,630
$6,757
$30,325
$1,042
$38,058
(a)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $113 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include 
IBM common stock of $40 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b)	Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e)	The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $6 million, representing 0.01 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $2 million 	
	 representing 0.004 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f)	 Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(g)	Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h)	Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i)	 Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(j)	 Invests in both equity and fixed income securities. 
(k)	Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $433 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. 
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $119 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South 
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair 
value hierarchy.


===== PAGE 131 =====
130
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
130
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2011. 
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (a)
$13,618 
$       11
$      —
$13,629 
$6,426 
$        —
$   —
$  6,427
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c)
32
1,877
—
1,909
240
7,751
—
7,991
Fixed income
Government and related (d)
—
15,105
29
15,134
—
8,479
96
8,575
Corporate bonds (e)
—
7,387
12
7,398
—
1,409
39
1,447
Mortgage and asset-backed securities
—
838
45
883
—
36
—
36
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f)
262
715
246
1,223
72
7,136
—
7,209
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
988
—
988
Cash and short-term investments (g)
286
2,390
—
2,675
145
361
—
506
Hedge funds
—
1,140
713
1,853
—
417
—
417
Private equity (h)
0
—
4,098
4,098
—
—
262
262
Private real estate (h)
—
—
2,790
2,790
—
—
580
580
Derivatives (i)
10
(15)
—
(6)
(2)
866
—
864
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j)
—
—
—
—
9
114
—
123
Subtotal
14,207
29,446
7,932
51,586
6,890
27,557
977
35,425
Other (k)
—
—
—
(368)
—
—
—
(62)
Fair value of plan assets
$14,207 
$29,446 
$7,932 
$51,218 
$6,890 
$27,557 
$977 
$35,362 
(a)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $132 million, representing 0.3 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include 
IBM common stock of $35 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b)	Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e)	The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $13 million, representing 0.03 percent of the U.S. Plan assets.
(f)	 Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(g)	Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h)	Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i)	 Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(j)	 Invests in both equity and fixed income securities. 
(k)	Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $38 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. 
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $112 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South 
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair 
value hierarchy.


===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
131
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2012 
and 2011 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Mortgage 
and Asset-
Backed 
Securities
Fixed Income 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Hedge 
Funds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2012
$ 29
$12
$45
$246
$713
$4,098
$2,790
$7,932
Return on assets held at end of year
0
0
1
21
56
855
202
1,135
Return on assets sold during the year
0
2
1
—
14
(334)
(41)
(359)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
(1)
(2)
(9)
—
(26)
(533)
(90)
(660)
Transfers, net
(22)
(1)
8
—
—
—
—
(15)
Balance at December 31, 2012
$   6
$11
$45
$267
$756
$4,085
$2,861
$8,032
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Mortgage 
and Asset-
Backed 
Securities
Fixed Income 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Hedge 
Funds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2011
$ —
$ —
$ 56
$221
$624
$4,251
$2,634
$7,786
Return on assets held at end of year
(0)
0
(1)
25
(35)
348
131
468
Return on assets sold during the year
0
(0)
(0)
—
5
(30)
39
14
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
12
5
(16)
—
(7)
(471)
(14)
(492)
Transfers, net
17
7
6
—
127*
—
—
157
Balance at December 31, 2011
$29
$12
$ 45
$246
$713
$4,098
$2,790
$7,932
* Due to an increase in the redemption term during 2011, the asset was transferred from Level 2 to Level 3.
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2012 
and 2011 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2012
$ 96
$ 39
$262
$580
$   977
Return on assets held at end of year
3
(1)
9
(5)
6
Return on assets sold during the year
3
1
9
0
14
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
(26)
(29)
62
14
21
Transfers, net
(2)
(5)
(0)
(3)
(10)
Foreign exchange impact
1
(0)
11
23
34
Balance at December 31, 2012
$ 76
$   5 
$353
$609
$1,042
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2011
$   —
$11
$176
$533
$720
Return on assets held at end of year
3
2
30
11
46
Return on assets sold during the year
(0)
(0)
(2)
(3)
(5)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
100
28
65
44
237
Transfers, net
—
—
(0)
0
0
Foreign exchange impact
(7)
(2)
(7)
(6)
(22)
Balance at December 31, 2011
$  96
$39 
$262
$580
$977


===== PAGE 133 =====
132
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
132
Valuation Techniques
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to 
measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valua-
tion techniques during 2012 and 2011.
	
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the 
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM 
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New 
York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are typically 
valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the administrator 
of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the 
value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities 
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding. These 
assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 depending on 
availability of quoted market prices.
	
The fair value of fixed income securities is typically estimated 
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar char-
acteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified as 
Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price reported 
on the major market on which the individual securities are traded.
	
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their 
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. 
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities 
of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2. 
	
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations 
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market 
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of such 
assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed 
periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to determine 
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These 
investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation methodology is 
applied consistently from period to period.
	
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price 
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are 
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close price. 
Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pricing 
models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, for exam-
ple, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and foreign 
exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2 
depending on availability of quoted market prices.
Expected Contributions
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions 
sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable 
employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the 
company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
	
The company contributed $557 million and $728 million in cash 
to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $60 million and 
$70 million in cash to non-U.S. multi-employer plans during the 
years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The cash 
contributions to multi-employer plans represent the annual cost 
included in net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consoli-
dated Statement of Earnings. The company has no liability for 
participants in multi-employer plans other than its own employees. 
As a result, the company’s participation in multi-employer plans has 
no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
	
In 2013, the company is not legally required to make any con-
tributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However, 
depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company 
may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP 
during the year. 
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law 
in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other 
provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain U.S. 
defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension 
plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes and raises 
tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-related benefit 
plans. The additional funding requirements by the Act apply to plan 
years beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act was updated by 
the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, which 
revised the funding requirements in the Act by clarifying that pension 
plans may smooth the value of pension plans over 24 months. 
At December 31, 2012, no mandatory contribution was required 
for 2013.
	
In 2013, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S. 
defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately 
$700 million, which will be mainly contributed to defined benefit 
pension plans in Japan, the UK and Switzerland. This amount 
represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. Financial 
market performance in 2013 could increase the legally mandated 
minimum contribution in certain countries which require monthly or 
daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could also 
elect to contribute more than the legally mandated amount based 
on market conditions or other factors. 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The company contributed $693 million and $362 million to the non-
pension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These contribution 
amounts exclude the Medicare-related subsidy discussed on page 
133. The 2012 amount includes a $400 million voluntary cash con-
tribution to the U.S. non-pension postretirement benefit plan. This 
advanced funding will be utilized to fund post-2012 benefit payments 
for Medicare-eligible prescription drugs.


===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
133
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments have been 
estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2012 and include benefits attributable to 
estimated future compensation increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Qualified 
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Nonqualified 
U.S. Plans 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total 
Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2013
$  3,303
$104
$  1,993
$   378
$  5,778
2014
3,342
106
2,040
373
5,861
2015
3,407
108
2,011
382
5,908
2016
3,438
112
2,049
389
5,988
2017
3,418
113
2,073
400
6,004
2018–2022
17,436
597
11,071
2,252
31,356
The 2013 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (underfunded 
plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants, as well 
as the expected receipt of the company’s share of the Medicare subsidy described below. These payments have been estimated based on 
the same assumptions used to measure the plan’s APBO at December 31, 2012.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Less: IBM 
Share of 
Expected 
Medicare 
Subsidy
Net Expected 
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total 
Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2013
$   462
$(24)
$   438
$  8
$  34
$   480
2014
447
(26)
421
8
38
467
2015
446
(26)
420
8
41
470
2016
437
(25)
412
9
44
465
2017
429
(24)
405
10
48
463
2018–2022
1,979
(21)
1,958
55
305
2,318
The 2013 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement 
benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets 
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current 
liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Medicare Prescription Drug Act
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement 
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company is expected to con-
tinue to receive a federal subsidy of approximately $298 million to 
subsidize the prescription drug coverage provided by the U.S. non-
pension postretirement benefit plan, which is expected to extend 
until 2018. Approx­imately $147 million of the subsidy will be used by 
the company to reduce its obligation and cost related to the U.S. 
nonpension postretirement benefit plan. The company will contribute 
the remaining subsidy of $151 million to the plan in order to reduce 
contributions required by the participants. The company received 
total subsidies of $53 million and $36 million for prescription drug-
related coverage during the years ended December 31, 2012 and 
2011, respectively, which were utilized to reduce the company contri-
butions to the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan. 
	
The company has included the impact of its portion of the sub-
sidy in the determination of net periodic cost and APBO for the U.S. 
nonpension postretirement benefit plan at and for the years ended 
December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. The impact of the subsidy 
resulted in a reduction in APBO of $134 million and $93 million at 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The impact of the subsidy 
resulted in a reduction in 2012, 2011 and 2010 net periodic cost of 
$35 million, $37 million and $19 million, respectively.


===== PAGE 135 =====
134
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
134
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of plan 
assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the table on page 124.
($ in millions)
2012
2011
At December 31:
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets
$99,184 
$83,799
$83,777
$70,570
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets
98,263
83,677
83,184
70,512
Plans with assets in excess of PBO
6,944
7,889
13,169
16,011
Note T.  
Segment Information
The company’s major operations consist of five business segments: 
Global Tech­nol­ogy Services, Global Business Services, Software, 
Systems and Technology and Global Financing. The segments 
represent components of the company for which separate financial 
information is available that is utilized on a regular basis by the chief 
executive officer in determining how to allocate resources and evalu-
ate performance. The segments are determined based on several 
factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, technology, 
delivery channels and similar economic characteristics.
	
Information about each segment’s business and the products 
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located in 
the “Description of Business” section on pages 23 and 24, and in 
“Segment Details,” on pages 26 through 31 in the Management 
Discussion.
	
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions 
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, 
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that are used by 
Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements are pri-
marily sourced internally from Systems and Technology and 
Software. For providing IT services that are used internally, Global 
Technology Services and Global Business Services recover cost, 
as well as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-
length value of providing the services. The Global Services 
segments enter into arm’s-length loans at prices equivalent to 
market rates with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of 
equipment used in services engagements. All internal transaction 
prices are reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
	
The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations 
to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a 
result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the 
segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain 
marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting, 
Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re­sources, and Billing and 
Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based 
on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., head count. When a clear 
and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are 
allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the company’s 
management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated based 
on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared 
expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to the 
segments. These expenses are associated with the elimination of 
internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.


===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
135
The following tables reflect the results of operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and measurement system 
utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income. These results are used, in part, by senior management, 
both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments. 
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
For the year ended December 31:
Global 
Technology 
Services
Global 
Business 
Services
Software
Systems and 
Technology
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments
2012
External revenue
$40,236 
$18,566 
$25,448 
$ 17,667
$2,013 
$103,930 
Internal revenue
1,166
719
3,274
676
2,060
7,896
Total revenue
$41,402 
$19,286 
$28,722 
$18,343 
$4,073 
$111,826 
Pre-tax income 
$  6,961
$  2,983
$10,810
$  1,227
$2,034 
$  24,015
Revenue year-to-year change
(1.7)%
(4.0)%
1.8%
(7.5)%
(2.9)%
(2.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
10.8%
(0.8)%
8.4%
(24.9)%
1.1%
4.8%
Pre-tax income margin
16.8%
15.5%
37.6%
6.7%
49.9%
21.5%
2011
External revenue
$40,879 
$19,284 
$24,944 
$ 18,985
$2,102 
$106,194 
Internal revenue
1,242
797
3,276
838
2,092
8,246
Total revenue
$42,121 
$20,081 
$28,219 
$19,823 
$4,195 
$114,440 
Pre-tax income 
$  6,284
$  3,006
$  9,970
$  1,633
$2,011 
$  22,904
Revenue year-to-year change
6.6%
5.6%
10.9%
5.6%
2.8%
7.1%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
14.3%
18.1%
5.3%
12.2%
2.8%
9.5%
Pre-tax income margin
14.9%
15.0%
35.3%
8.2%
47.9%
20.0%
2010
External revenue
$38,201 
$18,223 
$22,485 
$ 17,973
$2,238 
$  99,120
Internal revenue
1,313
798
2,950
804
1,842
7,707
Total revenue
$39,514 
$19,021 
$25,436 
$18,777 
$4,080 
$106,827 
Pre-tax income 
$  5,499
$  2,546
$  9,466
$  1,456
$1,956 
$  20,923
Revenue year-to-year change
2.0%
2.6%
5.7%
9.8%
0.1%
4.2%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
0.3%
1.8%
13.8%
12.1%
13.5%
8.3%
Pre-tax income margin
13.9%
13.4%
37.2%
7.8%
48.0%
19.6%


===== PAGE 137 =====
136
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
136
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Revenue
Total reportable segments
$111,826
$114,440 
$106,827 
Other revenue and adjustments
577
722
750
Elimination of internal transactions
(7,896)
(8,246)
(7,707)
Total IBM consolidated revenue
$104,507
$106,916
$  99,870
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Pre-tax income
Total reportable segments
$24,015
$22,904 
$20,923 
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(703)
(629)
(512)
Acquisition-related charges
(36)
(46)
(46)
Non-operating retirement- 
related (costs)/income
(538)
72
414
Elimination of internal transactions
(1,197)
(1,243)
(957)
Unallocated corporate amounts*
361
(56)
(98)
Total IBM consolidated  
pre-tax income
$21,902
$21,003 
$19,723 
*	 The 2012 amount includes the gain related to the Retail Store Solutions divestiture. 
The 2011 amount includes gains related to the sale of Lenovo common stock.
Immaterial Items
Investment in Equity Alliances  
and Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and 
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the segments 
did not have a material effect on the financial position or the financial 
results of the segments. 
Segment Assets and Other Items
Global Technology Services assets are primarily plant, property and 
equipment including the assets associated with the outsourcing 
business, accounts receivable, goodwill, acquired intangible assets, 
deferred services arrangement transition costs and maintenance parts 
inventory. Global Business Services assets are primarily goodwill 
and accounts receivable. Software assets are mainly goodwill, 
acquired intangible assets and accounts receivable. Systems and 
Technology assets are primarily plant, property and equipment, 
goodwill, manufacturing inventory and accounts receivable. Global 
Financing assets are primarily financing receivables and fixed assets 
under operating leases.
	
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equip-
ment, several segments may share plant, property and equipment 
assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets 
is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user seg-
ment. This is consistent with the company’s management system 
and is reflected accordingly in the table on page 137. In those cases, 
there will not be a precise correlation between segment pre-tax 
income and segment assets.
	
Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment 
are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be con-
sistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’ pre-tax 
income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income reflect 
occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are not specifi-
cally identified by the management reporting system. Capital 
expenditures that are reported by each segment also are consistent 
with the landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
	
Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest 
expense reflect the interest income and interest expense associated 
with the Global Financing business, including the intercompany 
financing activities discussed on page 24, as well as the income 
from investment in cash and marketable securities. The explanation 
of the difference between cost of financing and interest expense for 
segment presentation versus presentation in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings is included on page 66 of the Management 
Discussion.


===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
137
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
For the year ended December 31:
Global 
Technology 
Services
Global 
Business 
Services
Software
Systems and 
Technology
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments
2012
Assets
$15,884
$8,022
$26,291
$8,232
$38,882
$97,310
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,597
75
1,157
786
853
4,470
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,760
42
618
1,106
708
4,233
Interest income
—
—
—
—
1,942
1,942
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
410
410
2011
Assets
$15,475
$8,078
$23,926
$7,649
$36,427
$91,557
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,713
83
1,062
737
1,145
4,739
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,838
56
469
1,032
930
4,325
Interest income
—
—
—
—
2,139
2,139
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
538
538
2010
Assets
$15,560 
$8,007 
$22,625 
$7,287 
$35,813 
$89,292 
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,632
75
992
784
1,417
4,900
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,511
52
463
1,163
1,246
4,434
Interest income
—
—
—
—
2,116
2,116
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
548
548
* Segment pre-tax income does not include the amortization of intangible assets.


===== PAGE 139 =====
138
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
138
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Assets
Total reportable segments
$  97,310
$  91,557
$  89,292
Elimination of internal transactions
(4,943)
(5,407)
(5,515)
Unallocated amounts
Cash and marketable securities
9,779
10,575
10,113
Notes and accounts receivable
3,769
3,526
3,762
Deferred tax assets
5,194
4,865
4,494
Plant, other property  
and equipment
2,555
2,918
3,067
Pension assets
945
2,837
3,060
Other
4,604
5,562
5,178
Total IBM consolidated assets
$119,213
$116,433 
$113,452 
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s 
total revenue in 2012, 2011 or 2010.
Geographic Information 
The following provides information for those countries that are 
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Revenue*
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
United States
$  36,270
$  37,041 
$35,581 
Japan
10,697
10,968
10,701
Other countries
57,540
58,906
53,589
Total IBM consolidated revenue
$104,507
$106,916 
$99,870 
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client. 
Plant and Other Property-Net
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2012
2011
2010
United States
$  6,555
$  6,271
$  6,134
Other countries
6,299
6,186
6,298
Total
$12,854
$12,457 
$12,432 
Revenue by Classes of  
Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of 
products or services within the company’s reportable segments. 
Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, 
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other 
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software, 
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support are 
reported as Software, and software as a service, consulting, educa-
tion, training and other product-related services are reported as 
Services. Within Systems and Technology, Microelectronics original 
equipment manufacturer (OEM) revenue is primarily from the sale 
of semiconductors. Microelectronics Services revenue includes 
circuit and component design services and technology and manu-
facturing consulting services. See “Description of the Business,” 
beginning on page 21 for additional information. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
Global Technology Services
Services
$31,161
$31,746 
$29,367 
Maintenance
7,343
7,515
7,250
Systems
1,574
1,478
1,409
Software
159
140
175
Global Business Services
Services
$18,216
$18,956 
$17,858 
Software
208
211
236
Systems
142
118
129
Software
Software
$23,144
$22,921 
$20,882 
Services
2,304
2,022
1,603
Systems and Technology
Servers
$11,980
$12,362 
$11,619 
Storage
3,411
3,619
3,420
Microelectronics OEM
1,572
1,975
1,938
Retail Store Solutions
357
753
674
Microelectronics Services
346
277
321
Global Financing
Financing
$  1,471
$  1,612
$  1,580
Used equipment sales
542
490
659
Note U.  
Subsequent Events
On January 2, 2013, the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 
was signed into law extending several business tax provisions 
through 2013. Certain of these provisions were reinstated retroac-
tively to January 1, 2012. Accounting guidance requires that the 
effects of new legislation be recognized upon enactment. Accord-
ingly, the 2012 retroactive impact of the legislation, which is a tax 
benefit of approximately $135 million, will be included in the com-
pany’s first-quarter 2013 tax provision.
	
On January 29, 2013, the company announced that the Board 
of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.85 per common 
share. The dividend is payable March 9, 2013 to shareholders of 
record on February 8, 2013.
	
On February 5, 2013, the company issued $1 billion of 5-year 
fixed-rate bonds with a 1.25 percent coupon, and $1 billion of 2-year 
floating-rate bonds priced at three month London Interbank Offered 
Rate (LIBOR) minus two basis points.


===== PAGE 140 =====
139
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
Revenue
$104,507
$106,916
$  99,870
$  95,758
$103,630 
Net income
$  16,604
$  15,855
$  14,833
$  13,425
$  12,334
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  17,627
$  16,318
$  15,023
$  13,452
$  12,293
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    14.37
$    13.06
$    11.52
$    10.01
$      8.89
Basic
$    14.53
$    13.25
$    11.69
$    10.12
$      9.02
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    15.25
$    13.44
$    11.67
$    10.03
$      8.86
Cash dividends paid on common stock
$    3,773 
$    3,473
$    3,177
$    2,860
$    2,585
Per share of common stock
3.30
2.90
2.50
2.15
1.90
Investment in property, plant and equipment
$    4,082 
$    4,108
$    4,185
$    3,447
$    4,171
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity
81.6%
71.2%
66.8%
80.4%
48.7%
At December 31:
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
Total assets
$119,213 
$116,433 
$113,452 
$109,022 
$109,524 
Net investment in property, plant and equipment
13,996
13,883
14,096
14,165
14,305
Working capital
5,807
8,805
7,554
12,933
6,568
Total debt
33,269
31,320
28,624
26,099
33,926
Total equity
18,984
20,236
23,172
22,755
13,584
* Refer to page 62 of the company’s first-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2011 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the years 2008 through 2010. 
Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2012 and 2011.
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies


===== PAGE 141 =====
140
140
Selected Quarterly Data 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2012
First 
Quarter
Second 
Quarter
Third 
Quarter
Fourth 
Quarter
Full 
Year
Revenue
$24,673 
$25,783 
$24,747 
$29,304
$104,507
Gross profit
$11,118 
$12,281 
$11,732 
$15,167
$  50,298
Net income
$  3,066
$  3,881
$  3,824
$  5,833
$  16,604
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  3,265
$  4,077
$  4,155
$  6,129
$  17,627
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    2.61
$    3.34
$    3.33
$    5.13
$    14.37**
Basic
$    2.65
$    3.38
$    3.36
$    5.19
$    14.53**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    2.78
$    3.51
$    3.62
$    5.39
$    15.25**
Dividends per share of common stock
$    0.75
$    0.85
$    0.85
$    0.85
$      3.30
Stock prices+
High
$209.12 
$210.69 
$208.32 
$211.79 
Low
177.34
187.00
181.85
184.78
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2011
First 
Quarter
Second 
Quarter
Third 
Quarter
Fourth 
Quarter
Full 
Year
Revenue
$24,607 
$26,666 
$26,157 
$29,486
$106,916
Gross profit
$10,858 
$12,385 
$12,173 
$14,722
$  50,138
Net income
$  2,863
$  3,664
$  3,839
$  5,490
$  15,855
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  2,990
$  3,777
$  3,954
$  5,597
$  16,318
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    2.31
$    3.00
$    3.19
$    4.62
$    13.06**
Basic
$    2.34
$    3.04
$    3.23
$    4.68
$    13.25**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    2.41
$    3.09
$    3.28
$    4.71
$    13.44**
Dividends per share of common stock
$    0.65
$    0.75
$    0.75
$    0.75
$      2.90
Stock prices+
High
$166.05 
$172.87 
$185.21 
$194.56 
Low
147.05
162.33
157.54
173.29
  * Refer to page 61 of the company’s first-quarter 2012 Form 10-Q filed on April 24, 2012, pages 75 and 76 of the company’s second-quarter 2012 Form 10-Q filed on July 31, 2012, 
pages 75 and 76 of the company’s third-quarter 2012 Form 10-Q filed on October 30, 2012 and page 43 under the heading “GAAP Reconciliation,” for the reconciliation of non-
GAAP information for the quarterly periods of 2012 and 2011. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year 
2012 and 2011.
** Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed using 
the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
  + The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.


===== PAGE 142 =====
141
Performance Graph 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Comparison of Five-Year Cumulative Total Return for IBM,  
S&P 500 Stock Index and S&P Information Technology Index
The adjacent graph compares the five-year cumulative total returns 
for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative return of 
certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact that IBM is 
a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the SEC’s rules 
require the use of that index. Under those rules, the second index 
used for comparison may be a published industry or line-of-busi-
ness index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such an index. 
IBM is also included in this index.
	
The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial 
year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested 
on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons 
assume that all dividends are reinvested.
(U.S. Dollar)
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
  IBM Common Stock
$100.00
$79.24 
$125.67
$143.62
$183.01
$193.87
  S & P 500 Index
100.00
63.00
79.67
91.67
93.61
108.59
  S & P Information Technology Index
100.00
56.86
91.96
101.32
103.77
119.15
80
07
08
09
10
11
12
200
50
110
140
170


===== PAGE 143 =====
142
142
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Senior Leadership
Rodney C. Adkins
Senior Vice President  
Systems and Technology Group
Colleen F. Arnold
Senior Vice President 
Application Management Services
James P. Bramante
Senior Vice President 
Growth Markets
Michelle H. Browdy
Vice President, Assistant  
General Counsel and Secretary
Erich Clementi
Senior Vice President 
Global Technology Services
Michael E. Daniels
Senior Vice President
Robert F. Del Bene
Vice President and Treasurer
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen 
Senior Vice President  
Sales and Distribution
Jon C. Iwata
Senior Vice President 
Marketing and Communications
James J. Kavanaugh
Vice President and Controller
John E. Kelly III
Senior Vice President and Director 
Research
Robert J. LeBlanc
Senior Vice President 
Middleware Software Group
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President and  
Chief Financial Officer 
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
J. Randall MacDonald
Senior Vice President 
Human Resources
Steven A. Mills
Senior Vice President  
and Group Executive 
Software and Systems
Michael D. Rhodin
Senior Vice President 
Software Solutions Group
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer
Linda S. Sanford
Senior Vice President 
Enterprise Transformation
Timothy S. Shaughnessy
Senior Vice President 
GTS Services Delivery
Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President 
Global Business Services
Robert C. Weber
Senior Vice President 
Legal and Regulatory Affairs,  
and General Counsel
Board of Directors
Alain J.P. Belda
Managing Director 
Warburg Pincus LLC
William R. Brody
President 
Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Kenneth I. Chenault
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
American Express Company
Michael L. Eskew
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
United Parcel Service, Inc.
David N. Farr
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
Emerson Electric Co.
Shirley Ann Jackson
President 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Andrew N. Liveris
Chairman, President and 
Chief Executive Officer 
The Dow Chemical Company
W. James McNerney, Jr.
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer 
The Boeing Company
James W. Owens
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
Caterpillar Inc.
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer 
IBM
Joan E. Spero
Adjunct Senior Research Scholar 
Columbia University School of 
International and Public Affairs
Sidney Taurel
Senior Advisor 
Capital Royalty L.P.
Lorenzo H. Zambrano
Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
CEMEX, S.A.B. de C.V.


===== PAGE 144 =====
143
Stockholder Information 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence,  
Rhode Island 02940-3078  (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico 
should call (781) 575-2727
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A.  
by e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications 
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust 
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside 
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
IBM on the Internet
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found on the IBM home 
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM  
products, services and other activities can also be found at that address.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, 
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC.
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of information 
about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly 
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments  
to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material  
is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC (www.ibm.com/investor). 
These materials are available free of charge on or through our website.
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the 
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, 
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the 
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC 
maintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and 
information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file 
electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services 
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including  
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM  
stock certificates for safe­keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of  
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and 
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations,  
1 New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,  
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of the  
Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the meeting by calling 
(914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by 
writing to International Business Machines Corporation, 1 New Orchard 
Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
Annual Meeting
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,  
April 30, 2013, at 10 a.m. in the Von Braun Center, 700 Monroe Street SW, 
Huntsville, Alabama.
Literature for IBM Stockholders
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence,  
Rhode Island 02940-3078  (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and  
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports  
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K 
report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by 
early May, August and November.
An audio recording of the 2012 Annual Report will be available for  
sight-impaired stockholders in June 2013.
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values and  
its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including its innovative 
strategies for transforming communities through global citizenship.  
The Report Summary is available in printed form and downloadable  
at www.ibm.com/responsibility. The full Corporate Responsibility Report  
is online with downloadable sections at www.ibm.com/responsibility.
General Information
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and 
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts 
on the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can  
also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements 
online through the Internet at this site.
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental 
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States, 
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.


===== PAGE 145 =====
144
International Business Machines Corporation
1 New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
AIX, Algorithmics, BigFix, Cast Iron, Coremetrics, DemandTec, Emptoris,  
i2, IBM, IBM SmartCloud, iCluster, Initiate Systems, Jazz, Lombardi,  
Lotus, Netezza, OpenPages, Power, POWER7+, Power Systems,  
PureSystems, Rational, Smarter Analytics, Smarter Cities, Smarter  
Commerce, Smarter Planet, Sterling Commerce, Storwize, System x,  
System z, Tealeaf, Tivoli, TRIRICA, Unica, Vivisimo, Watson, WebSphere, 
Worklight, XIV and zEnterprise are trademarks or registered trademarks  
of International Business Machines Corporation or its wholly owned  
subsidiaries. Jeopardy! is a registered trademark of Jeopardy Productions, 
Inc. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, 
other countries, or both. Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle  
Corporation. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open Group in  
the United States and other countries. Other company, product and  
service names may be trademarks or service marks of others. 
Printed in the U.S.A.    COL03002-USEN-03
Design: VSA Partners, Inc.    Illustration: The Design Surgery    Photography: Jens Umbach    Printing: RR Donnelley


===== PAGE 146 =====
