

===== PAGE 1 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 2 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
The cover of our report to you last year asked: “What will we make  
of this moment?”
This was the critical and urgent decision that we — and our clients — faced. 
Would we seize upon the major shifts that are reordering our industry and 
opening up vast new applications of information technology? 
In my letter, I described our answer:
•	 IBM would help transform industries and professions with data. 
•	 We would remake enterprise IT for the era of cloud. 
•	 We would reimagine work by helping clients build systems of 
engagement, underpinned by the imperative of security. 
At the same time, we would address significant challenges in some of  
our businesses, principally hardware. 
We knew we faced a critical year of transformation. It proved to be just 
that. The work of transforming IBM continues, and much remains to  
be done. But I am pleased to report that we made significant progress 
and built momentum in 2014.
In this letter I will describe what we have done, and continue to do,  
to transform and differentiate your company and to position ourselves  
for leadership in the new era now taking shape. 
1
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 3 =====
VIRGINIA M. ROMETTY
Chairman, President  
and Chief Executive Officer

2


===== PAGE 4 =====
Continuing to move to higher value 
Information technology is one of the most dynamic, fast-
changing and fiercely competitive industries in the world, 
characterized by relentless cycles of innovation and 
commoditization. Our choice is clear: We pursue a model  
of high-value innovation, rather than commodity technology, 
products and services. Our commitment to this model 
compels us to reinvent businesses continually; grow new 
ones organically and through acquisitions; and occasionally 
divest businesses that do not fit our profile. 
You see all of this reflected in our 2014 results — a dynamic 
shift of our portfolio underneath our $92.8 billion in revenue, 
$21 billion in operating pre-tax income and operating 
earnings per share of $16.53 from continuing operations. 
Consider that we completed or announced the divestiture  
of three businesses in 2014 that a year earlier drove  
$7 billion in revenue, but lost about $500 million in profit —  
what I call “empty calories.” At the same time, we are  
making significant investments in line with the strategy  
I described to you last year. 
Throughout the year you saw the bold moves we made:
•	 $1 billion to accelerate the commercialization of IBM 
Watson, bringing cognitive computing to more clients  
and partners in more industries.
•	 $1.2 billion to expand our SoftLayer cloud centers around 
the world. We expect to have 46 locations by the end  
of 2015.
•	 $1 billion to create IBM Bluemix, our cloud platform-as- 
a-service for software developers.
•	 Further scaling our global IBM Cloud business through 
partnerships with SAP and Tencent.
2014
$92.8 billion  
Revenue
$21 billon  
Operating pre-tax  
income
$16.53  
Operating EPS
3
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 5 =====
•	 IBM Watson Analytics, offering powerful cognitive and 
visually intuitive analytics in the palm of your hand.
•	 A landmark partnership with Apple to bring mobility to  
the enterprise and reimagine the work of professionals. 
•	 A strategic alliance with Twitter to bring an entire new 
category of Big Data to business. 
These investments will contribute to the strong growth we 
are seeing in our strategic imperatives, which deliver high 
value and now represent a significant part of IBM. Together, 
cloud, analytics, mobile, social and security generated  
$25 billion of revenue in 2014, growing by 16 percent. Five years 
ago, these businesses represented just 13 percent of our 
revenue. Today, that has risen to 27 percent of IBM’s revenue.
Big Data and analytics. Our analytics business grew 
7 percent to $17 billion in 2014. We are driving growth by 
helping our clients integrate all data sources — structured 
and unstructured — and apply a range of analytics —  
descriptive, predictive and prescriptive. We combine  
this capability with deep knowledge of industries and 
professions. Our analytics portfolio draws upon more than 
30 acquisitions and includes nine Analytics Solutions 
Centers with an ecosystem of more than 6,000 business 
partners. Further, we are creating the next stage of Big 
Data and analytics with cognitive computing.
Cloud. Our cloud business is growing rapidly — up 60 
percent to $7 billion in 2014, with “as-a-service” at $3 billion, 
up nearly 80 percent and exiting the year with a run rate of 
$3.5 billion. IBM Cloud is set apart by focusing on hybrid 
environments optimized for data and security, shaped by 
our knowledge of the requirements of enterprise clients. 
For example, the planetwide footprint of cloud centers that 
we are building will provide clients the combination of 
global and localized data access and security that they 
need. This is unmatched in the industry. 
Engagement, underpinned by security. In mobile,  
our growth more than tripled in 2014. Going forward, we 
expect this to benefit from the apps from our strategic 
alliance with Apple and our global network of digital design 
studios. Further, IBM is the global leader in enterprise 
security, grounded not only in technology and our 3,700 
patents, but in our experience-based understanding  
of the changing nature of the challenge. Enter­prises and 
institutions discover that they cannot wall out attackers. 
Twenty-first century security is a Big Data problem —  
which is why our security business, with unequalled data 
and analytics capability, grew 19 percent in 2014.
At the same time that we have been growing new businesses, 
we have been reinventing our core franchises. Last year  
we promised to address challenges in our Systems and 
Technology business. We did so in 2014, with hardware going 
from losses in the first half to nearly $400 million of profit in 
the fourth quarter alone. That is a remarkable swing.
In transforming this business, we took several important actions:
•	 We sold our x86 server business and announced  
the divestiture of our commercial semiconductor 
technology business.
•	 We committed $3 billion over the next five  
years to the development of next-generation  
semi­conductor technologies.

4


===== PAGE 6 =====
Engines of Growth: 
IBM’s Strategic Imperatives
Today, our strategic imperatives  
have become a significant part of IBM. 
Together, cloud, analytics, mobile, 
social and security represented  
27 percent of IBM’s revenue in 2014. 
IBM generated more than 3,000 patents 
in these areas in 2014 and remains 
differentiated in our ability to integrate 
these technologies with our clients’ core 
business processes, data and systems.
In 2014, our strategic 
imperatives generated
 $25B
in revenue, growing 
by 16 percent.
13%
2010
2014
27%
STRATEGIC IMPERATIVE  
REVENUE MIX
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
20%
23%
18%
17%
16%
9%
9%
9%
16%
10%
STRATEGIC IMPERATIVE 
REVENUE GROWTH VS THE MARKET*
  IBM Strategic Imperatives
  Served Market Strategic Imperatives
* Data reflects actual currency rates.
5
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 7 =====
•	 We introduced major technological advances with 
POWER8 and software defined storage — built for cloud 
and Big Data. 
•	 In January 2015 we launched our new z13 mainframe.  
Built for the mobile era, it processes massive volumes  
of transactions while tapping back-office data and 
simultaneously applying real-time analytics for deeper 
insights and fraud detection.
•	 Historically, we kept our industry-leading Power technology 
all to ourselves. Today, we see greater value by enabling  
an OpenPOWER ecosystem, which allows partners to 
innovate and build on the Power technology. Launched  
in 2013, the OpenPOWER Foundation began with five 
members and now stands at more than 100 around the 
world. The U.S. Department of Energy recently awarded 
IBM a long-term, $325 million contract to create future 
supercomputers based on OpenPOWER technology.
All of this speaks to the enduring quality of IBM as a high-
value innovation company. Last year we again spent about 
6 percent of our revenue on research and development —  
and the ratio within our software business is double that.  
We invested $4 billion on capital expenditures. IBMers are 
prolific innovators. For the 22nd straight year, we earned the 
most U.S. patents of any organization, averaging 20 a day. 
2015: Our transformation continues
Our direction is clear. We remain confident in our strategy, 
and we have made much progress. In 2015 we will build on 
our momentum: 
1. We will shift an additional $4 billion of spending  
to data, cloud and engagement this year, aimed at 
deepening our differentiation in the marketplace.  
In February we introduced innovations to make hybrid 
cloud a reality for the enterprise. We are also growing our 
portfolio of industry-specific analytics solutions in areas 
ranging from counter-fraud and oil and gas exploration, to 
airline maintenance and the Internet of Things. And we 
began the year by establishing a number of business units 
focused on markets and industries being transformed by 
our strategic imperatives: IBM Commerce, IBM Analytics, 
IBM Security and IBM Cloud. We have announced plans 
for an IBM Healthcare unit.
2. We will continue to bring innovation to our core 
franchises ­— innovation highly valued by our clients.  
I previously mentioned the entirely refreshed line of 
mainframes, IBM Power Systems and storage. We will 
continue to apply breakthroughs from IBM Research to  
our products and services. In software, we will accelerate 
our march to “as-a-service.” In services, we will deploy 
advanced automation to delivery. And we will continue 
helping new and existing outsourcing clients transform  
their infrastructure and processes by leveraging IBM’s 
hybrid cloud platform. This was an important differentiator 
in helping us to sign nearly 50 contracts worth greater 

6


===== PAGE 8 =====
than $100 million in 2014 and to maintain a services 
backlog of $128 billion. 
These core franchises also provide the foundation for 
future innovation and growth. One example is our 
partnership with Apple. Together, we are placing powerful 
analytics capabilities in the hands of professionals.  
These apps are integrated with critical business systems,  
work flows and data sets. That’s what enables an airline 
attendant to rebook a flight while en route; a financial 
advisor to model a portfolio in the client’s living room;  
an in-store sales assistant to act as a trusted fashion 
advisor; or an emergency responder to have real-time 
situation-risk awareness, including live video.
3. We believe open ecosystems and partnerships  
are key to our future innovation. This is a significant  
new element of our growth strategy. We will add to and 
scale partnerships with companies like Apple, Twitter,  
SAP, Tencent and now, SoftBank. Also, the IBM Watson 
Ecosystem is rapidly expanding, with 4,000 companies  
in the pipeline.
Together, these actions will make IBM an even higher-value 
business. We expect our strategic imperatives of cloud, 
analytics, mobile, social and security to continue growing by 
double digits and to become a greater percentage of IBM. 
We will remain the enterprise leader in these markets. 
Finally, we will continue to return substantial value to you,  
our owners, through dividends and gross share repurchases. 
Last year, these were $4.3 billion and $13.7 billion, respectively. 
In 2014 we marked our 19th consecutive year of raising our 
dividend and our 99th year of paying one.
 “IBM lives at the intersection  
of technology and business.  
This enables us to change the  
way the world works, and in  
so doing, to be essential to our  
clients and to society.”
7
A Letter from the Chairman


===== PAGE 9 =====
This letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP fi nancial measures that are 
made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance.
This letter also includes certain historical information on strategic imperatives revenue which has 
been measured on a consistent basis. For information about the company’s fi nancial results 
related to operating pre-tax income and operating earnings per share, on a continuing operations 
basis, which are non-GAAP measures, see the company’s 2014 Annual Report, which is Exhibit 13 
to the Form 10-K submitted to the SEC on February 24, 2015. For reconciliation and other 
information concerning these items refer to page 45 of the company’s 2014 Annual Report.
An essential company
So I come back to this moment, full of rapid change, but 
even more opportunity  — and to IBM’s unique purpose as 
an enterprise.
IBM lives at the intersection of technology and business. 
This enables us to change the way the world works, and in 
so doing, to be essential to our clients and to society. 
We work with 90 percent of the world’s top banks, 9 of the 
top 10 oil and gas companies, 40 of the top 50 retailers and 
92 of the top 100 healthcare organizations. IBM systems 
manage banking, reservations, transportation, retail, trading 
and healthcare systems. Our mainframes alone process 
75 percent of the world’s business data. 
Today we are building upon this foundation to create an 
entirely new generation of critical systems. IBM’s clients are 
unclogging city traffi c, exploring a cure for cancer, improving 
the safety of food supplies, reducing risk, and serving their 
own customers, employees, citizens and patients with 
greater levels of understanding, personalization and intimacy. 
A new world is taking shape before our eyes, remade by 
data, rewritten in code and growing smarter every day.
This is the work that energizes me and all of my fellow IBMers. 
I am deeply grateful to the IBM team for bringing us here, 
and to you, our shareholders, for your support. I hope you 
share our excitement about your company’s path and the 
shared opportunity we have, together, to do something that 
is truly essential. 
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Offi cer
 
8


===== PAGE 10 =====
What We Are Making
Wh t W A
M ki
of this Moment:
A
f t
f
ti
A year of transformation
d a rapidly
One year ago, we described our strategy to lead a
reordering information technology industry. We said that a new
d
i
i f
ti
t
h
l
i d
t
W
i
era was driving the reinvention of all enterprises — including
our own. And we committed to accelerate that transformation.
In the year that followed, the pace of change picked up,
d, the pace of change picked up,
and we made much progress. In the following pages, we share
ogress. In the following pages, we 
highlights of that story — some of the ways we are:
• Transforming industries and professions with data.
• Remaking enterprise IT for the era of cloud.
•
ogies.
Reimagining work through mobile and social technolo
• Rethinking the challenge of security.
• Creating new infrastructure for a new era.
9
2014 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 11 =====
 Transforming
 industries
 and professions
 with data
IBM WATSON SOLUTIONS 
AND APPLICATIONS
A growing portfolio of Watson applications 
is extending the expertise of leading 
professionals — wealth managers, 
researchers, retailers and more — to their 
peers around the world. For example, 
doctors at Bumrungrad International 
Hospital in Bangkok treat 1.1 million patients 
from 190 countries each year, and will 
be using IBM Watson for Oncology, 
trained by Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, to plan the most effective 
treatments based on each cancer 
patient’s profi le. 
THE WORLD’S FIRST COGNITIVE 
SYSTEM: IBM WATSON
IBM Watson enables entirely new 
kinds of discovery, as well as new ways 
for humans and computers to work 
together. In 2014 we turned this 
technology breakthrough into a thriving, 
multidimensional business. Through the 
cloud-based IBM Watson Ecosystem, 
developers and partners can now embed 
cognitive computing APIs (application 
program interfaces) into their apps. 
Since November 2014, 6,800 developers 
have built more than 7,000 cognitive 
apps. Finally, IBM Watson Analytics 
brings intuitive visualization and predictive 
analytics to every business user.
To mine and refi ne the world’s vast new natural resource 
of Big Data requires a new class of advanced analytics. 
IBM’s unmatched analytics capabilities draw upon more than 
30 acquisitions and include nine Analytics Solutions Centers 
with an ecosystem of more than 6,000 business partners. 
Our global leadership in analytics was also key to last year’s 
alliance between IBM and Twitter. Together, we will help 
enterprises unlock insights from the 500 million Tweets 
generated every day — bringing a whole new category of data 
to the enterprise and using it to develop unique solutions for 
fi nancial services, consumer products, retail and more. 
 
10


===== PAGE 12 =====
Business analytics
revenue was
 $17B
in 2014
Business analytics
revenue increased
7%
in 2014
 $1B
investment in IBM 
Watson, including 
$100 million dedicated 
to venture capital 
to support start-ups 
IBM Watson doubled
its client base 
every quarter in 2014. 
It now spans
17
industries in
24 countries 
11
2014 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 13 =====
Remaking 
enterprise  
IT for the era 
of cloud
	
SPEECH TO TEXT
	
	 (IBM WATSON)
	
QUESTION AND ANSWER 
	
	
(IBM WATSON)
DASHDB
INTERNET OF THINGS
CLOUDANT NoSQL DB
TIME SERIES DATABASE
GEOSPATIAL ANALYTICS
	
TRADEOFF ANALYTICS
	
	
(IBM WATSON)

12


===== PAGE 14 =====
IBM’s cloud business has grown rapidly, thanks to increasing  
client demand for high-value solutions across public, private and 
hybrid clouds. Cloud revenue grew 60 percent, to $7 billion,  
in 2014. One reason for this growth is that we understand the data  
and architectural requirements of enterprise clients. In 2014 we 
globally scaled our hybrid cloud platform with new data centers. 
These feature our SoftLayer “pod” design, giving clients local 
access to virtual and bare metal servers, all integrated with low-
latency networking capabilities. IBM’s cloud footprint is designed  
for a business IT future that will be both global and local. 
FORGING PARTNERSHIPS
Our partnership with SAP is delivering 
world-leading enterprise applications as 
services on the IBM Cloud. And our alliance 
with Chinese Internet giant Tencent will 
bring cloud-based transformation to that 
country’s growing enterprise economy.
IBM BLUEMIX
We are investing $1 billion in IBM Bluemix 
to give developers cloud-based tools to 
design, deploy and manage enterprise-
grade apps at start-up speed. It is offered 
on the IBM Cloud marketplace, which 
features nearly 500 IBM and third-party 
cloud services.
MAKING HYBRID REAL FOR  
THE ENTERPRISE
Major innovations for hybrid cloud, 
introduced in February 2015, offer clients 
control, visibility and security as they use 
open standards to break down barriers 
among environments. As we advance 
IBM’s leadership in this space, more  
than half of our cloud development team  
is devoted to hybrid cloud services and 
platforms on open standards.
Cloud 
revenue was
 $7B
in 2014
Cloud revenue 
increased
 60%
in 2014
 46
IBM Cloud data  
centers worldwide  
will be in place  
by the end of 2015
 $4B
invested in software- 
as-a-service  
acquisitions for  
business professionals
13
2014 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 15 =====
IBM INTERACTIVE EXPERIENCE 
Reimagining work also means 
transforming how products and services 
are created, delivered and used. We are 
globally expanding our hybrid consulting 
and digital agency services to help  
clients create new, personalized models  
of engagement through data and design. 
The 10 new IBM Interactive Experience 
studios allow clients to work side-by-side 
with researchers and consultants, as well 
as experts in experience design, mobile 
and digital marketing.
IBM MOBILEFIRST 
Drawing upon thousands of patents in 
mobile and social, our IBM MobileFirst 
solutions, built for the cloud, provide more 
than 5,000 enterprise clients with security, 
data and analytics integration and end- 
to-end device management. Our mobile 
revenue more than tripled in 2014. 
Reimagining  
work
Mobile and social technologies are changing the way 
organizations engage with the world, and especially with 
individuals — consumers, employees, patients, students and 
citizens. This means reimagining work itself — the ways in 
which professionals in any field do their jobs. That’s why 
enterprises are now building new systems of engagement, 
infused with their unique expertise and integrated with their 
critical business systems and data sets. Enabling people to 
work smarter means putting more real-time information and 
decision-making power literally in the palms of their hands, 
integrated securely with business processes and workflow.

14


===== PAGE 16 =====
APPLE + IBM 
Apple and IBM are developing intuitive 
business apps for professionals across 
multiple industries — from flight crews and 
retailers, to bankers, financial advisors, 
insurance agents, government caseworkers 
and law enforcement officers. We currently 
have 14 IBM MobileFirst for iOS apps in 
market, and many more are planned by the 
end of 2015. Built exclusively for iPhone and 
iPad, these apps are delivered in a security- 
rich environment, embedded with analytics 
and linked to core enterprise processes. 
NO. 1
IBM Interactive 
Experience is 
the world’s largest 
digital agency
We now have
6,000
IBM mobile  
consultants  
and experts
100
industry specific  
IBM MobileFirst  
for iOS apps to be  
developed
15
2014 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 17 =====
Rethinking 
the 
challenge 
of security

16


===== PAGE 18 =====
SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTERS
Over the past decade, we have spent 
nearly $2 billion on security research and 
development resulting in 3,700 security-
related patents. Our 10 global Security 
Operations Centers manage and monitor 
15 billion events daily. We help protect 
more than 10,000 clients worldwide.
SECURITY ANALYTICS
Our security software and services help 
clients protect against advanced threats. 
We offer analytics, fraud protection, 
identity and access management, and 
leading application, data and infrastructure 
security capabilities — as well as cloud  
and mobile solutions to help clients 
innovate without increasing risk. For 
example, in 2014 IBM introduced the 
Threat Protection System which 
includes an end-to-end architecture of 
analytics and forensics software that  
helps organizations continuously prevent, 
detect and respond to ongoing and 
sophisticated cyberattacks, and in many 
cases, eliminate the threat before the 
damage has occurred.
Cybersecurity attacks can go undetected for months. Security for 
complex, 21st century enterprises is no longer only about building 
“firewalls” to keep intruders out. It’s now a Big Data problem — which 
is why IBM is the global leader in enterprise IT security. Our unique 
analytics capabilities anticipate and protect against a fluid threat 
landscape and a new generation of organized cybercriminals. IBM’s 
intelligent immune systems can detect even the smallest anomalies, 
in time to protect an organization’s vital data. 
15B
events monitored 
and managed 
each day
Security revenue 
increased
19%
in 2014
Double-digit  
revenue growth  
in security for
 9
straight quarters
17
2014 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 19 =====
With the onset of real-time Big Data, hybrid clouds and  
an increasingly mobile economy, companies’ IT infrastructures  
face unprecedented demands. The world’s leading banks, oil  
and gas companies, retailers, healthcare organizations and more 
rely on IBM to run their systems of record, manage their data,  
help to ensure their security and integrate their applications and 
processes. Our hardware and software foundation is essential  
to their business — and to ours. Which is why we continuously 
reinvent our core. During the last 18 months, we have reimagined 
the mainframe for the tremendous growth of mobile workloads, 
created a breakout IBM Power Systems strategy focused on 
open innovation, developed next-generation software defined 
storage technology and made strategic moves across our portfolio 
to combine the strengths of middleware, servers and storage  
for a modern IT backbone. At the same time, we exited businesses 
that do not offer similar opportunities for innovation and growth.
Creating new 
infrastructure 
for a 
new era

18


===== PAGE 20 =====
POWER8 
IBM debuted new Power Systems servers 
that allow data centers to manage Big Data 
with unprecedented speed, on an open 
server platform. Built on IBM’s POWER8 
technology, IBM Power Systems servers 
are the result of a $2.4 billion investment 
and three-plus years of development, 
leveraging the innovations in hundreds of 
IBM patents.
OPENPOWER 
Through the OpenPOWER Foundation, 
industry leaders are building innovative, 
custom systems based on the  
POWER architecture for fully optimized 
industry and workload-speciﬁc solutions. 
Today, the OpenPOWER Foundation  
has more than 100 members, including 
founders Google, IBM, Mellanox, NVIDIA, 
Tyan and new member Rackspace.
SOFTWARE DEFINED STORAGE 
Leveraging more than 700 patents in  
this space, the IBM Spectrum Storage 
portfolio helps clients unify their  
storage management, store data of all 
types, and ﬂexibly deploy storage either  
as software, as an appliance or as a  
cloud-based service. 
IBM z13
The new z13, launched in January  
2015, reinvents the mainframe for the 
growing mobile economy. Capable  
of processing 2.5 billion transactions  
a day, it incorporates real-time  
encryption and analytics to exceed 
consumers’ expectations for security, 
speed and response time.
One z13 mainframe 
can perform 
30,000
transactions per  
second
IBM software defined 
storage can reduce 
storage costs by up to 
90%
19
2014 IBM Annual Report


===== PAGE 21 =====
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Revenue
$ 92,793 
$ 98,367 
Net income
$ 12,022 
$ 16,483 
Income from continuing operations
$ 15,751 
$ 16,881 
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$ 16,702 
$ 18,356 
Earnings per share of common stock (continuing operations)
Assuming dilution
$  15.59 
$  15.30 
Basic
$  15.68 
$  15.42 
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* 
$  16.53 
$  16.64 
Net cash provided by operating activities
$ 16,868 
$ 17,485 
Capital expenditures, net
3,779 
3,768 
Share repurchases
13,679 
13,859 
Cash dividends paid on common stock
4,265 
4,058 
Per share of common stock
4.25
3.70 
At December 31:
2014
2013
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
$  8,476 
$ 11,066 
Total assets
117,532 
126,223 
Working capital
9,822 
11,196 
Total debt
40,804 
39,718 
Total equity
12,014 
22,929 
Common shares outstanding (in millions)
991 
1,054 
Market capitalization 
$158,920 
$197,772 
Stock price per common share
$ 160.44 
$ 187.57 
* See pages 45 and 46 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
20
Financial Highlights 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies


===== PAGE 22 =====
21
Report of Financials 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION
Overview	
22
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements	
23
Management Discussion Snapshot	
23
Description of Business	
26
Year in Review	
33
Prior Year in Review	
53
Other Information 	
64
	
Looking Forward	
64
	
Liquidity and Capital Resources	
65
	
Critical Accounting Estimates	
68
	
Currency Rate Fluctuations	
71
	
Market Risk	
72
	
Financing Risks	
72
	
Cybersecurity	
73
	
Employees and Related Workforce	
73
Global Financing	
73
Report of Management	
78
Report of Independent Registered  
	
Public Accounting Firm	
79
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Earnings	
80
Comprehensive Income	
81
Financial Position	
82
Cash Flows	
83
Changes in Equity	
84
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED  
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
	A	 Significant Accounting Policies	
 86
	B	 Accounting Changes	
96
	C 	Acquisitions/Divestitures	
97
	D 	Financial Instruments	
103
	E	 Inventories	
110
	F	 Financing Receivables	
110
	G	 Property, Plant and Equipment 	
113
	H	 Investments and Sundry Assets	
113
	I	 Intangible Assets Including Goodwill	
114
	J	 Borrowings	
115
	K	 Other Liabilities	
118
	L	 Equity Activity	
118
	M	 Contingencies and Commitments	
122
	N	 Taxes	
124
	O	 Research, Development and Engineering	
127
	P	 Earnings Per Share of Common Stock	
127
	Q	 Rental Expense and Lease Commitments	
128
	R	 Stock-Based Compensation	
128
	S	 Retirement-Related Benefits	
131
	T	 Segment Information	
145
	U	 Subsequent Events	
150
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data	
151
Selected Quarterly Data	
152
Performance Graph	
153
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership	
154
Stockholder Information	
155


===== PAGE 23 =====
22
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW
The financial section of the International Business Machines Cor­
por­ation (IBM or the company) 2014 Annual Report includes the 
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State­ments 
and the Notes to Consolidated Financial State­ments. This Over­
view is designed to provide the reader with some perspective 
regarding the information contained in the financial section.
Organization of Information
•	 The Management Discussion is designed to provide  
readers with an overview of the business and a narrative on 
the company’s financial results and certain factors that  
may affect its future prospects from the perspective of the 
company’s management. The “Management Discussion 
Snap­shot,” beginning on page 23, presents an overview of 
the key performance drivers in 2014.
•	 Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 33, the 
Manage­ment Discussion contains the results of operations 
for each reportable segment of the business and a discus-
sion of the company’s financial position and cash flows. 
Other key sections within the Management Discussion 
include: “Looking Forward” on page 64, and “Liquidity and 
Capital Resources” on page 65.
•	 Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured 
as a stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section 
is included in the Management Discussion beginning on 
page 73.
•	 The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on 
pages 80 through 85. These statements provide an overview 
of the company’s income and cash flow performance and  
its financial position. 
•	 The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Among other items, the Notes contain the company’s 
accounting policies (pages 86 through 96), acquisitions and 
divestitures (pages 97 through 102), detailed information on 
specific items within the financial statements, certain contin-
gencies and commitments (pages 122 to 124) and 
retirement-related plans information (pages 131 to 145).
•	 The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have 
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles 
generally accepted in the United States (GAAP).
•	 In October 2014, the company announced a definitive agree-
ment to divest its Microelectronics business. The assets and 
liabilities of the Microelectronics business are reported as 
held for sale at December 31, 2014. The operating results of 
the Microelectronics business are reported as discontinued 
operations. Prior periods have been reclassified to conform 
to this presentation in the Management Discussion, the  
Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes, where 
applicable, to allow for a meaningful comparison of continu-
ing operations.
•	 The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant 
currency” in the Management Discussion do not include 
operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in 
foreign currency rates. Certain financial results are adjusted 
based on a simple mathematical model that translates current 
period results in local currency using the comparable prior 
year period’s currency conversion rate. This approach is used 
for countries where the functional currency is the local country 
currency. This information is provided so that certain finan-
cial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations 
in foreign currency rates, thereby facilitating period-­to-period 
comparisons of business performance. See “Currency Rate 
Fluctuations” on page 71 for additional information.
•	 Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual 
Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to  
the use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes.  
Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying 
whole-dollar numbers.
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational 
results of the business, the company separates business results 
into operating and non-operating categories. Operating earn-
ings from continuing operations is a non-GAAP measure that 
excludes the effects of certain acquisition-related charges, retire-
ment-related costs, discontinued operations and their related tax 
impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings exclude the amor-
tization of purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related 
charges such as in-process research and development, transac-
tion costs, applicable restructuring and related expenses and tax 
charges related to acquisition integration. For retirement-related 
costs, the company characterizes certain items as operating and 
others as non-operating. The company includes defined benefit 
plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan service cost, 
amortization of prior service cost and the cost of defined contribu-
tion plans in operating earnings. Non-operating retirement-related 
cost includes defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement 
benefit plan interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amor-
tized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan curtailments/
settlements and multi-employer plan costs, pension insolvency 
costs and other costs. Non-operating retirement-related costs are 
primarily related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities 
which are tied to financial market performance and the company 
considers these costs to be outside the operational performance 
of the business. 
	
Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a 
view of operating earnings as described above provides increased 
transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the 
business and the performance of the company’s pension plans; 
improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts on 
operational performance; enables better comparison to peer com-
panies; and allows the company to provide a long-term strategic 
view of the business going forward. The company’s reportable 
segment financial results reflect operating earnings from continu-
ing operations, consistent with the company’s management and 
measurement system. 


===== PAGE 24 =====
23
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
FORWARD-LOOKING AND  
CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may consti-
tute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private 
Secur­ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking 
statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on 
which it is made; the company assumes no obligation to update 
or revise any such statements. Forward-looking statements are 
based on the company’s current assumptions regarding future 
business and financial performance; these statements, by their 
nature, address matters that are uncertain to different degrees. 
Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncer-
tainties and other factors that could cause actual results to be 
materially different, as discussed more fully elsewhere in this 
Annual Report and in the company’s filings with the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the company’s 2014 
Form 10-K filed on February 24, 2015.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$  92,793
$  98,367
(5.7)%*
Gross profit margin
50.0%
49.5%
0.5 pts.
Total expense and other (income)
$  26,421
$  28,440
(7.1)%
Total expense and other  
(income)-to-revenue ratio
28.5%
28.9%
(0.4) pts.
Income from continuing  
operations before income taxes
$  19,986
$  20,244
(1.3)%
Provision for income taxes  
from continuing operations
$    4,234
$    3,363
25.9%
Income from continuing  
operations
$  15,751
$  16,881
(6.7)%
Income from continuing  
operations margin
17.0%
17.2%
(0.2) pts.
Loss from discontinued  
operations, net of tax
$   (3,729)
$      (398)
  NM
Net income
$  12,022
$  16,483
(27.1)%
Earnings per share from  
continuing operations:
Assuming dilution
$    15.59
$    15.30
1.9%
Consolidated earnings per share—
assuming dilution
$    11.90
$    14.94
(20.3)%
Weighted-average shares 
outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,010.0
1,103.0
(8.4)%
Assets**
$117,532
$126,223
(6.9)%
Liabilities**
$105,518
$103,294
2.2%
Equity**
$  12,014
$  22,929
(47.6)%
  * (4.0) percent adjusted for currency; (1.5) percent adjusted for divestitures and 
currency.
** At December 31.
NM—Not meaningful
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for 2014 and 2013.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$12,022
$16,483 
(27.1)%
Loss from discontinued operations, 
net of tax
(3,729)
(398)
NM
Income from continuing operations
$15,751
$16,881 
(6.7)%
Non-operating adjustments 
(net of tax):
Acquisition-related charges
670
747
(10.3)
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
280
729
(61.5)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$16,702
$18,356
(9.0)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share
$  16.53
$  16.64
(0.7)%
* See pages 45 and 46 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating 
earnings.
NM—Not meaningful
In 2014, the company reported $92.8 billion in revenue, and 
delivered $20.0 billion in pre-tax income and diluted earnings 
per share from continuing operations of $15.59 as reported and 
$16.53 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The results of continu-
ing operations exclude a net loss from discontinued operations of 
$3.7 billion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013 related to the expected 
divestiture of the Microelectronics business. On a consolidated 
basis, net income in 2014 was $12.0 billion, with diluted earnings 
per share of $11.90. The company generated $16.9 billion in cash 
from operations and $12.4 billion in free cash flow in 2014 enabling 
shareholder returns of $17.9 billion in gross common stock repur-
chases and dividends.
	
Total consolidated revenue decreased 5.7 percent as reported 
and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency 
(2 points) in 2014 versus 2013. In 2014, the company divested its 
industry standard server and customer care businesses. The com-
pany’s strategy is focused on leading in the areas with the most 
value in enterprise information technology (IT), and in 2014 the 
company made tremendous progress in repositioning its portfolio 
and making investments to shift into these areas.
	
The company’s portfolio includes: strategic imperatives for 
growth, recurring core franchises and high value transactional 
businesses. These areas of the portfolio span across all of the 
company’s business segments. Each area of the portfolio has 
different business model characteristics and objectives. The com-
pany’s results in 2014 reflected these characteristics. 
	
First, the company has a set of strategic imperatives for growth 
that are focused on the market shifts in data, cloud and engage-
ment. The model for these combined strategic imperatives is to 
deliver double-digit revenue growth, with high contribution from 
Software, which drives a more profitable business mix. In 2014, 
revenue from cloud, analytics, mobile, social and security solutions 


===== PAGE 25 =====
24
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
combined increased 16 percent with double-digit growth in each 
quarter. In total, the strategic imperatives generated $25 billion 
in revenue, which represented approximately 27 percent of total 
revenue. Business analytics revenue of $17 billion increased 7 per-
cent year to year with growth led by the consulting business as 
the company helps clients extract value from their data. Cloud 
revenue of $7 billion was up 60 percent year to year as client 
demand grows for higher-value cloud solutions across public, 
private and hybrid clouds. Cloud delivered as a service revenue 
increased approximately 75 percent to $3 billion in 2014, and exited 
the year with an annual run rate of $3.5 billion. Cloud revenue also 
includes the company’s foundational offerings where it provides 
software, hardware and services to clients to build private clouds. 
In engagement, the mobile business more than tripled year to year 
with strong growth in MobileFirst driven by the integrated portfo-
lio of offerings. In addition, Social was up 3 percent and Security 
increased 19 percent year to year. 
	
The company is continuing to shift its investments and 
resources to the strategic imperatives and solutions that address 
clients’ most critical needs. During 2014, the company spent 
approximately 6 percent of revenue in research and development 
and invested approximately $4 billion on capital investments—
supporting actions in a number of areas that will yield financial 
benefits in the future. For example: 
•	 Launched Bluemix, the company’s cloud platform-as-a- 
service for the enterprise.
•	 Investing to globally expand the SoftLayer cloud datacenters.
•	 Investing to bring Watson’s capabilities to the enterprise and 
building a partner ecosystem, effectively creating a market 
for cognitive computing.
•	 Introduced cloud application innovations around Watson 
Analytics and Verse. 
•	 Launched POWER8, and building the OpenPOWER consortium.
•	 Formed a partnership with Apple for enterprise mobility, with 
Twitter for big data, and with SAP and Tencent for cloud. 
The recurring core franchises include the annuity businesses, and 
the highly recurring portions of the transactions business, such as 
mainframe revenue from the largest clients. This content has annu-
ity characteristics, and in many cases, it supports mission critical 
processes for clients. The model for these combined businesses 
is to have stable revenue, with improving margins. In 2014, rev-
enue was down approximately 3 percent with a modest decline in 
margin. The decline was primarily driven by the mainframe product 
cycle and currency.
	
The company’s high-value transactional businesses include 
project-based work in services, transactional software, Power Sys-
tems and Storage—in areas other than the strategic imperatives. 
The objective for these businesses is to optimize the business 
model and maintain margins. In 2014, revenue declined year to year, 
with gross margins over 40 percent. Performance reflected the 
secular challenges faced in some parts of the hardware business 
as the company works through the transitions resulting from the 
actions taken to reposition the hardware business for high value.
	
In 2014, the company divested businesses that no longer fit its 
strategic profile—industry standard servers, customer care busi-
ness process outsourcing services and the announced divestiture 
of the Microelectronics business. These three businesses gener-
ated approximately $7 billion of revenue when reported in 2013, but 
had a pre-tax loss of approximately $500 million. The divestitures 
reduce revenue but improve the company’s profit profile, consis-
tent with the shift to higher value.
	
From a segment perspective, Global Services revenue declined 
3.5 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for the 
divestitures (2 points) and currency (2 points). Global Technology 
Services (GTS) declined 3.7 percent as reported, but increased 
2 percent adjusted for the divestitures (3 points) and currency 
(3 points) with growth in Outsourcing and Integrated Technology 
Services. Global Business Services revenue decreased 3.1 percent 
(1 percent adjusted for currency) with Application Outsourcing rev-
enue down 8 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency). Software 
revenue declined 1.9 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency). 
Total middleware revenue was flat as reported, but increased 
1 percent at constant currency. Systems and Technology revenue 
decreased 23.0 percent as reported and 17 percent adjusted for 
the divested industry standard server business (5 points) and cur-
rency (1 point). Performance reflected the impact of the System z 
product cycle as well as declines in Power Systems and Stor-
age. In 2014, the company took significant actions to reposition 
the Systems and Technology business for higher value, and rein-
forced its commitment to driving innovation in high-end systems 
and storage. 
	
From a geographic perspective, revenue in the major markets 
declined 4.3 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for the 
divestitures (2 points) and currency (1 point). Growth markets reve-
nue decreased 9.9 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for 
the divestitures (3 points) and currency (4 points) compared to the 
prior year. Within the growth markets, the BRIC countries (Brazil, 
Russia, India and China) decreased 10.7 percent as reported 
and 5 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency 
(3 points). 
	
The consolidated gross profit margin of 50.0 percent improved 
0.5 points year to year. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 
of 50.6 percent increased 0.1 points compared to the prior year 
primarily driven by an improved mix toward Software.
	
Total expense and other (income) decreased 7.1 percent in 2014 
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and 
other (income) decreased 6.3 percent compared to the prior year. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
25
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The year-to-year drivers were approximately:
	
	
Total 	
Operating 
	
	
Consolidated 	
 (non-GAAP)
•	 Currency* 	
(1)	 point	
(1)	 point
•	 Acquisitions**	
2	 points	
2	 points
•	 Base expense	
(8)	 points	
(7)	 points
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is 
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges. 
The reported base expense reflects not only the ongoing run rate 
of the business, but also the impact of divestitures and work-
force rebalancing charges. The company recorded pre-tax gains 
of $1.6 billion in 2014 related to the divestitures of the industry 
standard server ($1.4 billion) and customer care ($0.2 billion) busi-
nesses. Workforce rebalancing charges in 2014 were $1.5 billion, 
an increase of $0.4 billion year to year. Excluding the gains from 
the divested businesses and the impact of workforce rebalancing 
charges, operating (non-GAAP) base expense decreased 3 points 
year to year versus the 7 point as reported decrease. Within 
base expense, the company is continuing to shift resources and 
spending to areas with the most opportunity—including Watson, 
SoftLayer, Bluemix and support of strategic partnerships, including 
the Apple partnership.
	
Pre-tax income from continuing operations decreased 1.3 per-
cent and the pre-tax margin was 21.5 percent, an increase of 
1.0 points versus 2013. The continuing operations effective tax 
rate for 2014 was 21.2 percent, an increase of 4.6 points versus 
the prior year primarily driven by benefits in the 2013 rate associ-
ated with discrete items. Income from continuing operations of 
$15.8 billion decreased 6.7 percent and the net income margin was 
17.0 percent, a decrease of 0.2 points versus 2013. Losses from 
discontinued operations, net of tax, were $3.7 billion in 2014 com-
pared to $0.4 billion 2013. Net income of $12.0 billion decreased 
$4.5 billion year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income 
from continuing operations decreased 4.4 percent year to year 
and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing 
operations improved 0.3 points to 22.8 percent versus the prior 
year. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations 
of $16.7 billion decreased 9.0 percent and the operating (non-
GAAP) income margin from continuing operations of 18.0 percent 
decreased 0.7 points. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax 
rate from continuing operations in 2014 was 21.0 percent versus 
17.0 percent in 2013.
	
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of 
$15.59 increased 1.9 percent year to year reflecting the benefits 
of the common stock repurchase program. In 2014, the company 
repurchased 71.5 million shares of its common stock. Operat-
ing (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $16.53 decreased 
0.7 percent versus the prior year driven primarily by the impacts 
of decreased revenue and the higher tax rate, partially offset by 
the impact of share repurchases. Diluted earnings per share from 
discontinued operations was ($3.69) in 2014 compared to ($0.36) 
in 2013. 
	
At December 31, 2014, the company continued to have the 
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash 
and marketable securities at year end was $8.5 billion, a decrease 
of $2.6 billion from December 31, 2013. Key drivers in the balance 
sheet and total cash flows were:
	
Total assets decreased $8.7 billion ($2.7 billion adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2013 driven by: 
•	 Decreases in prepaid pension assets ($3.4 billion), property, 
plant and equipment ($3.1 billion) driven primarily by the 
expected divestiture of the Microelectronics business 
($2.4 billion), cash and cash equivalents ($2.2 billion) and 
total receivables ($1.7 billion); partially offset by
•	 Increased deferred taxes ($2.2 billion).
Total liabilities increased $2.2 billion ($7.0 billion adjusted for cur-
rency) from December 31, 2013 driven by:
•	 Increases in pension liabilities ($2.0 billion) and total debt 
($1.1 billion). 
Total equity of $12.0 billion decreased $10.9 billion from Decem-
ber 31, 2013 as a result of:
•	 Increased treasury stock ($13.5 billion) primarily from share 
repurchases, and increased losses in accumulated other 
comprehensive income/(loss) ($6.3 billion), driven primarily  
by the year-end remeasurement of the retirement-related 
liabilities; partially offset by
•	 Higher retained earnings ($7.8 billion) and higher common 
stock ($1.1 billion). 
The company generated $16.9 billion in cash flow provided by 
operating activities, a decrease of $0.6 billion when compared 
to 2013, driven primarily by a higher level of cash tax payments 
($1.7 billion). Net cash used in investing activities of $3.0 billion 
was $4.3 billion lower than 2013, primarily due to a decrease in 
cash used for acquisitions ($2.4 billion) and an increase in cash 
provided from divestitures ($2.1 billion). Net cash used in financing 
activities of $15.5 billion increased $5.6 billion compared to the 
prior year, driven primarily by lower net cash proceeds from total 
debt ($5.2 billion). 
	
In 2014, the company made significant progress in its con-
tinuing transformation, investing to position the business for the 
longer term. In January 2015, the company disclosed that it is 
expecting GAAP earnings in the range of $14.35 to $15.10 and 
operating (non-GAAP) earnings between $15.75 and $16.50 per 
diluted share from continuing operations for 2015. The company 
also stated that it expects free cash flow in 2015 to be relatively 
flat compared to 2014.
	
For the first quarter of 2015, the company expects mid sin-
gle-digit earnings per share growth from continuing operations, 
primarily driven by the large workforce rebalancing charge that 
was recorded in the first quarter of 2014.


===== PAGE 27 =====
26
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the 
SEC on February 24, 2015 for a more detailed version of this Des­
cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
The company creates value for clients through integrated solu-
tions and products that leverage: data, information technology, 
deep expertise in industries and business processes, and a broad 
ecosystem of partners and alliances. IBM solutions typically create 
value by enabling new capabilities for clients that transform their 
businesses and help them engage with their customers and 
employees in new ways. These solutions draw from an industry-
leading portfolio of consulting and IT implementation services, 
cloud and cognitive offerings, and enterprise systems and software; 
all bolstered by one of the world’s leading research organizations. 
Strategy
In a time of unprecedented technological change, IBM’s strategy 
remains one of innovation and a constant drive to deliver higher 
value for our clients.
	
Key tenets of the company’s strategy include:
1. Our strategic imperatives: Data, cloud and engagement are 
fundamentally transforming the IT industry, the company and our 
clients’ businesses. The tremendous growth of data is redefin-
ing today’s competitive advantage. With data as the world’s new 
“natural resource,” it is fundamentally transforming industries and 
professions. Yet as with all natural resources, only by refining data 
into actionable insights through analytics does it become valuable 
to the customer’s business. Cloud computing—the delivery of IT 
and business processes as digital services—offers opportunities 
for enterprises to reinvent not just their operations, but their entire 
business model and approaches to innovation. Engagement, 
including mobile and social technologies, is profoundly changing 
how people interact and the way work gets done. Finally, these 
transformations are all supported and protected by high levels 
of security to ensure privacy and integrity of action. These three 
imperatives—data, cloud and engagement—are the foundation of 
IBM’s strategy today and its vision for the future.
2. Our unique strength: Our ability to connect new technologies 
with the systems currently running today’s enterprises is a key 
value-added service and market differentiator for IBM. Clients 
today want more than just adopting new technologies—they want 
IBM to fuse new solutions with their existing systems. This “bring-
ing together” is what the company calls Hybrid Cloud, and IBM is 
uniquely able to bring this value to its clients.
3. Our migration to higher levels of business value: Clients look 
to IBM to solve their business challenges and opportunities rather 
than just providing technology. Our evolution over decades—from 
hardware to software and services, and increasingly to full-fledged 
business solutions—reflects this critical shift in meeting client 
needs. IBM brings together the full breadth of its integrated offer-
ings and industry expertise to be essential to its clients and deliver 
higher value. 
1. Our Strategic Imperatives
Data: transforming industries and professions
Fueled by the proliferation of mobile devices, social media and the 
infusion of technology into virtually all aspects of business, data 
is the world’s new natural resource. Without powerful analytics, 
however, it is just data.
	
Across all industries, enterprises are working hard to harvest 
new insights from the explosion of available data—the new basis 
for today’s competitive advantage. The advantage for enterprises 
increases as they apply more sophisticated approaches to refin-
ing their data, turning them into insights that are actionable and 
add value. The advent of cognitive computing, which mirrors the 
same cognitive process that people use every day to understand 
the world around them, is profoundly redefining the relation-
ship between humans and information. Cognitive systems learn, 
navigate the language and protocols of expert communities, and 
communicate in natural language.
	
IBM has invested more than $26 billion, including over $17 
billion on more than 30 acquisitions, to build its capabilities in 
big data and analytics. One third of IBM Research’s spending is 
focused on data, analytics and cognitive computing. 
	
In 2014, IBM reported nearly $17 billion in business analyt-
ics revenue, and the company established the Watson Group 
to develop and commercialize cognitive computing innovations. 
The company has committed a $1 billion investment to Watson, 
including $100 million dedicated to venture investments to support 
start-ups building cognitive apps through the Watson Developer 
Zone on Bluemix. The company is also making Watson more 
widely available through the Watson Ecosystem, which has grown 
to more than 160 partners with nearly 4,000 future partners seek-
ing to build a new generation of cognitive apps. IBM also launched 
Watson Analytics, a breakthrough natural language-based cogni-
tive service that provides instant access to powerful predictive 
and visual analytic tools for businesses. Through Watson Analyt-
ics, IBM is extending analytics to the end user, not just the data 
scientist. IBM’s goal is to give every business professional access 
to advanced cognitive-powered predictive analytics, coupled with 
new forms of data.
	
In addition in 2014, the company made bold moves by estab-
lishing key alliances. In the data space, the company announced a 
ground-breaking partnership with Twitter to incorporate Twitter’s 
massive data streams into IBM’s cloud-based analytics, customer 
engagement platforms and consulting services. Enterprises will 
now be able to understand customer sentiment more deeply and 
anticipate sudden shifts in moods and markets by tapping into the 
Twitter data in powerful new ways. This capability will also allow 
clients to integrate Twitter data into their own cloud services and 
mobile apps.


===== PAGE 28 =====
27
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cloud: reinventing IT
Cloud is at the heart of the digital revolution. No enterprise is 
untouched by this revolution and the shifts are occurring rapidly.
	
Enterprises are benefitting from cloud by using it to transform 
their IT and business processes into digital services. Much has 
been written about how cloud enables the sharing of infrastruc-
ture—this is true. However the real promise of cloud is much more 
profound. By forcing greater levels of standards up and down the 
technology value chain, new products and services, and even 
entire business models, are able to be created in weeks rather 
than months or years. 
	
Cloud is a catalyst for innovation. IBM has invested more than 
$8 billion to acquire 18 companies related to cloud, and is investing 
more than $1 billion to expand its global footprint to 40 datacen-
ters worldwide. IBM now has more than 120 software-as-a-service 
(SaaS) offerings, and IBM Cloud supports 24 of the top 25 Fortune 
500 companies, driving $7 billion of revenue for cloud-based solu-
tions in 2014.
•	 SoftLayer is the foundation for IBM’s expansive infrastruc-
ture-as-a-service portfolio. It offers bare metal, private cloud 
and virtual server instances, which means it can cover many 
different workloads with unprecedented performance. Soft-
Layer offers a built-in private network which can handle huge 
capacity and gives users the ability to isolate public/private 
networks with controls for access and location of data.
•	 Bluemix is IBM’s platform-as-a-service, built on the open 
standards foundation of Cloud Foundry and powered by 
SoftLayer’s cloud infrastructure. SoftLayer offers cloud- 
based services, APIs and leading third-party services to 
developers in an integrated platform. Bluemix also allows 
them to mix and match different tools to build apps in  
the cloud for mobile, Web, big data and analytics—to name  
just a few. 
•	 IBM Cloud marketplace brings together the company’s vast 
portfolio of cloud capabilities, delivering a self-service, digital 
experience for developers, IT and business leaders. Visitors 
have access to a growing portfolio of cloud capabilities from 
IBM and qualified third-party vendors. Open integration 
including pre-built APIs and hybrid options enable enterprise 
integration and composable business models. 
The IBM Cloud is the most powerful choice for enterprise-grade 
environments—bringing unparalleled levels of security, perfor-
mance and scalability. As a result, in 2014, IBM formed a strategic 
alliance with SAP to run its business applications on IBM’s cloud.
Engagement: re-imagining work
Social, mobile and unprecedented access to data are changing 
how individuals and institutions work together. A new class of 
customer has emerged: one who is empowered with knowledge, 
enriched by networks and expects value in return for sharing infor-
mation. Enterprises must create a systematic approach to engage 
these newly empowered customers through more personalized 
interactions. IBM calls these new forms of interactions “engage-
ment”—and includes social collaboration and mobile—both 
underpinned by high levels of security.
	
In 2014, the mobile, social and security portfolio generated 
double-digit growth with mobile revenue more than tripling versus 
2013, security revenue up 19 percent and social business growing 
3 percent. In addition, IBM has acquired 23 companies related to 
mobile, social and security.
	
On the mobile front, IBM and Apple formed an historic part-
nership to transform enterprise mobility as we know it today. 
Together, IBM and Apple are joining forces to bring the ease-of-use 
of personal apps to the enterprise environment. Together, the two 
companies are bringing the first wave of industry-specific apps to 
the market—targeting the needs of individual workers and helping 
to solve long-standing industry challenges.
	
In addition, MobileFirst remains IBM’s unified approach to help 
clients and partners deliver best-in-class mobile solutions, take 
advantage of more commercial opportunities and provide a supe-
rior customer experience.
	
On the social collaboration front, in 2014, IDC named IBM the 
worldwide market share leader in Enterprise Social Software for 
the fifth consecutive year.(1) In addition, IBM Verse, powered by IBM 
analytics and advanced search, is a new cloud-based messag-
ing and social collaboration solution to manage the workday. It 
provides a seamless user experience across social networking, 
meetings, chat, documents, mail, and an array of intelligent, secu-
rity-rich and engaging social apps on mobile devices or the Web.
	
Security is a boardroom-level issue. It is also a key enabler 
for the continued growth of data, cloud and engagement. Enter-
prises—and their clients—demand that these activities be secure 
as a requirement for participation.
	
The magnitude, sophistication and complexity of today’s secu-
rity threats are growing. With the proliferation of data on mobile 
devices, in social media and in the cloud, breaches are more vis-
ible and occur on a heightened scale. IBM Security solutions use 
sophisticated analytics to identify and thwart attacks in real time—
protecting our clients’ information, processes and people.
	
IBM Security brings to our clients high-end consulting, 
advanced fraud and threat protection, identity and access man-
agement, application and data security, mobile and cloud security, 
network and end-point protection with services for cloud.
(1)	IDC Worldwide Enterprise Social Networks 2014–2018 Forecast and 2013 Vendor 
Shares, July 23, 2014.


===== PAGE 29 =====
28
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2. Our Unique Strength
Data, cloud and engagement are powerful forces changing the 
landscape of technology and businesses. However, enterprise 
clients need more. Enterprises need to bring this new world of 
technology together with the existing systems that currently run 
their businesses if they are to capture their full value. This combina-
tion is what we refer to as Hybrid Cloud.
	
Without bringing these worlds together, these new tech-
nologies become “islands” within the enterprise. For example, a 
business that invests in a social media platform engages with and 
captures the sentiment of individual customers. These can be valu-
able interactions. However, much deeper insight into the needs 
and wants of an individual customer comes when combining the 
social media interactions with the historical purchase and engage-
ment records of that customer—as stored in existing systems. By 
combining these insights, the enterprise personalizes interactions 
in ways that are relevant and meaningful to that customer.
	
IBM is unique in bringing this Hybrid world to its clients with our 
unparalleled strength in both the existing and the new worlds of IT. 
	
IBM supports its clients’ mission critical processes, and 
remains the “go-to” platform for the enterprise. For example, 
more than 90 percent of the top 100 banks and the top 25 U.S. 
retailers run on IBM systems. In addition, nearly half of the Fortune 
100 companies outsource IT operations to IBM. The company’s 
leadership in enterprise computing provides the foundation for 
strategic partnerships as leading companies want to work with 
IBM, as evidenced by the Apple, SAP, Twitter and Tencent partner-
ships announced in 2104.
	
Combine this with the company’s strength in the new worlds 
of data, cloud and engagement—and IBM brings a unique and 
important capability to the market.
3. Our Migration to Higher Value
Technology by itself does not create value for a business. Tech-
nology enables a business to achieve its aspirations by facilitating 
richer interactions with clients and ecosystems, by unlocking 
deeper insight and by enabling faster actions.
	
IBM has continuously evolved its mission to deliver increasingly 
higher levels of business value to its clients. Starting primarily as 
a hardware company, IBM has added a rich portfolio of software 
and services to add higher value.
	
This next phase of IBM’s transformation will realize the full 
breadth of the portfolio by bringing higher-value added solutions 
to our clients. Examples include:
•	 Using predictive analytics to reduce customer attrition rates 
through the IBM Customer Data solution.
•	 Detecting fraudulent claims before payments are made 
through the IBM Counter Fraud solution. 
•	 Preventing costly and unscheduled downtime of equipment 
through early detection of anomalies with the IBM Predictive 
Asset Optimization solution.
The focus on integrated solutions will make IBM a stronger partner 
with its clients as the company takes another step in its continuous 
evolution to higher levels of value. 
Summary
One constant throughout IBM’s over 100-year history has been the 
need to continually transform the company in an ever-changing 
industry. Our industry, our clients—and IBM itself—is in the midst 
of such a fundamental transformation.
	
This is a transformation of unparalleled growth and promise:
•	 The promise of technology to bring extraordinary levels of 
insight to human endeavors through advances in analytics 
and cognitive computing.
•	 The promise of the cloud as a catalyst for innovation, freeing 
enterprises to focus more on the uses of technology rather 
than just the technology itself. 
•	 The promise of enterprises engaging with their customers, 
their employees and their business partners through richer, 
more personalized means.
•	 All underscored by security to help protect the integrity of 
every interaction.
We are excited about the prospects for growth and value for our 
clients—and for IBM—and we look forward to helping our clients 
transform their businesses for the future. 
Business Model
The company’s business model is built to support two principal 
goals: helping enterprise clients to become more innovative, effi-
cient and competitive through the application of business insight 
and IT solutions; and providing long-term value to shareholders. 
The business model has been developed over time through strate-
gic investments in capabilities and technologies that have superior 
long-term growth and profitability prospects based on the value 
they deliver to clients. 
	
The company’s global capabilities include services, software, 
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad 
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide inte-
grated solutions to the company’s clients. 
	
The business model is dynamic, adapting to the continuously 
changing market and economic environment. The company con-
tinues to divest certain businesses and strengthen its position 
through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-
value areas. In addition, the company has transformed itself into 
a globally integrated enterprise which has improved overall pro-
ductivity and is driving investment and expanding participation in 
markets with significant long-term opportunity. 
	
This business model, supported by the company’s financial 
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash 
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.
Business Segments and Capabilities
The company’s major operations consists of five business seg-
ments: Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, 
which the company collectively calls Global Services, Software, 
Systems and Technology and Global Financing.


===== PAGE 30 =====
29
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services: is a critical component of the company’s strategy 
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions to 
clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM software 
and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if a client 
solution requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global 
Services segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from 
outsourcing and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services 
backlog provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within 
Global Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech-
nology Services and Global Business Services.
Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT infra-
structure and business process services, creating business value 
for clients through unique technology and IP integrated services 
within its global delivery model. By leveraging insights and experi-
ence drawn from IBM’s global scale, skills and technology, with 
applied innovation from IBM Research, clients gain access to 
leading-edge, high-quality services with improved productivity, 
flexibility, cost and outcomes.
GTS Capabilities
Strategic Outsourcing: delivers comprehensive IT outsourcing ser-
vices dedicated to transforming clients’ existing infrastructures 
to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk manage-
ment and financial value. The company integrates long-standing 
expertise in service management and technology with the ability 
to exploit the power of new technologies from IBM systems and 
software, such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization, 
to deliver high performance, innovation and improved ability to 
achieve business objectives.
Global Process Services: included within Strategic Outsourcing, 
delivers a range of offerings consisting of standardized through 
transformational solutions including processing platforms and 
business process outsourcing. These services deliver improved 
business results to clients through the strategic change and/or 
operation of the client’s business processes, applications and 
infrastructure. Global Process Services will be integrated within 
Global Business Services beginning in 2015.
Integrated Technology Services: delivers a portfolio of project- 
based and managed services that enable clients to transform and 
optimize their IT environments by driving efficiency, flexibility and 
productivity, while reducing costs. The standardized portfolio is 
built around key assets and patented software, and incorporates 
best practices and proven methodologies that ensure predictive 
quality of delivery, security and compliance.
Cloud: delivers a comprehensive set of cloud services ranging 
from assisting clients with building their own private clouds, to 
building customized dedicated managed clouds, to allowing cli-
ents to leverage standardized cloud infrastructure services from 
the SoftLayer and Cloud Managed Services offerings, to creating 
hybrid environments linking their private and public workloads 
together. This portfolio of cloud offerings spans across the GTS 
business lines.
Technology Support Services (Maintenance Services): delivers 
a complete line of support services from product maintenance 
through solution support to maintain and improve the availability 
of clients’ IT infrastructures.
Global Business Services (GBS) has the mission to deliver pre-
dictable business outcomes to the company’s clients across two 
primary business areas: Consulting and Systems Integration and 
Application Management Services. These professional services 
deliver business value and innovation to clients through solu-
tions which leverage industry and business process expertise. 
The role of GBS is to drive initiatives that integrate IBM content 
and solutions and drive the progress of the company’s strategic 
imperatives. As clients transform themselves in response to market 
trends like big data, social and mobile computing, GBS helps cli-
ents use these technologies to reinvent relationships with their 
customers and realize new standards of efficacy and efficiency 
in the internal processes, data and applications that they use to 
run their businesses.
GBS Capabilities
Consulting and Systems Integration: delivering client value with 
solutions in Strategy and Transformation, Application Innovation 
Services, Enterprise Applications and Smarter Analytics. Consult-
ing is also focused on bringing to market client solutions that drive 
Smarter Commerce, Cloud, Mobile and Social Business.
Application Management Services: delivers application manage-
ment, maintenance and support services for packaged software, 
as well as custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered 
through advanced capabilities in areas such as application test-
ing and modernization, cloud application services, the company’s 
highly differentiated globally integrated capability model, industry 
knowledge and the standardization and automation of applica-
tion management.
Software consists primarily of middleware and operating sys-
tems software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate 
systems, processes and applications across a standard software 
platform to improve their business results, solve critical prob-
lems and gain competitive advantage within their industries. IBM 
middleware is designed on open standards, making it easier to 
integrate disparate business applications, developed by different 
methods and implemented at different times. Operating systems 
are the software engines that run computers. Approximately 
70 percent of external Software segment revenue is annuity based, 
coming from recurring license charges, software sold “as a ser-
vice” and ongoing post-contract support. The remaining revenue 
relates to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements in which clients 
pay one, up-front payment for a perpetual license. Typically, the 
sale of OTC software includes one year of post-contract support. 
Clients can also purchase ongoing post-contract support after 
the first year, which includes unspecified product upgrades and 
technical support.


===== PAGE 31 =====
30
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software Capabilities
WebSphere: delivers capabilities that enable organizations to run 
high-performance business applications. With these applications, 
clients can integrate and manage business processes across their 
organizations with the flexibility and agility they need to respond 
to changing conditions. Built on services-oriented architecture 
(SOA), and open standards support for cloud, mobile and social 
interactions, the WebSphere platform enables enterprises to 
extend their reach and optimize interactions with their key con-
stituents. Smarter Commerce software helps companies better 
manage and improve each step of their value chain and capitalize 
on opportunities for profitable growth, efficiency and increased 
customer loyalty.
Information Management: enables clients to integrate, manage 
and analyze enormous amounts of data from a large variety of 
sources in order to gain competitive advantage and improve their 
business outcomes. With this approach, clients can extract real 
value out of their data and use it to make better business decisions. 
IBM’s middleware and integrated solutions include advanced 
database management, information integration, data governance, 
enterprise content management, data warehousing, business ana-
lytics and intelligence, predictive analytics and big data analytics.
Watson Solutions: the first commercially available cognitive com-
puting platform that has the ability to interact in natural language, 
processing vast amounts of big data, and learning from its interac-
tions with people and computers. As an advisor, Watson is able 
to sift through and understand large amounts of data delivering 
insights with unprecedented speeds and accuracy.
Tivoli: helps clients optimize the value they get from their infrastruc-
tures and technology assets through greater visibility, control and 
automation across their end-to-end business operations. These 
asset management solutions foster integrated service delivery 
for cloud and datacenter management, enterprise endpoint and 
mobile device management, asset and facilities management, and 
storage management. Tivoli includes security systems software 
that provides clients with a single security intelligence platform 
that enables them to better secure all aspects of their enterprise 
and prevent security breaches.
Workforce Solutions: enables businesses to connect people 
and processes for more effective communication and increased 
productivity through collaboration, messaging and social network-
ing software. By remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, 
IBM’s social business offerings help organizations reap real ben-
efits associated with social networking, as well as create a more 
efficient and effective workforce.
Rational: supports software development for both IT and com-
plex embedded system solutions, with a portfolio of products and 
solutions supporting DevOps and Smarter Product Development, 
transforming the way lines of business, development and opera-
tions work together to deliver innovation via software.
Mobile: spans middleware and offers customers true end-to-end 
mobile solutions across platform and application development, 
mobile security, and mobile device management. Leveraging pow-
erful analytics and usage data, customers are provided with the 
ability to have more compelling interactions with their clients and 
workforce, increasing touchpoints and deepening relationships. 
The mobile offerings provide the ability to increase workforce pro-
ductivity through enhanced collaboration, improved knowledge 
sharing and increased response speed.
	
In January 2015, the company made several changes designed 
to more effectively align its key capabilities and resources to its 
strategic imperatives. These changes will enable the company to 
respond more quickly to critical client agendas and drive higher 
value. Across Software, the company is transitioning its portfolio to 
capture growth and continue to drive innovation. The focus will be 
centered around analytics, security, and commerce—similar to the 
action the company implemented in 2014 with Watson—utilizing its 
software assets to improve speed and agility in bringing integrated 
solutions to its clients.
Systems and Technology (STG) provides clients with innovative 
infrastructure technologies to help meet the new requirements of 
data, cloud and engagement—from deploying advanced analytics, 
to moving to digital service delivery with the cloud, and securing 
mobile transaction processing. Approximately half of Systems and 
Technology’s server and storage sales transactions are through 
the company’s business partners; with the balance direct to end-
user clients. In addition, Systems and Technology provides leading 
semiconductor technology, products and packaging solutions for 
IBM’s own advanced technology needs.
Systems and Technology Capabilities
Servers: a range of high-performance systems designed to address 
capacity, security, speed and compute power needs for busi-
nesses, organizations and technical computing applications. After 
the divestiture of the System x industry standard server business, 
the portfolio includes System z, a trusted enterprise platform for 
integrating data, transactions and insight, and Power Systems, a 
system designed from the ground up for big data, optimized for 
scale-out cloud and Linux, and delivering open innovation with 
OpenPOWER. The company is also a founding member of the 
OpenPOWER foundation, a group of industry-leading companies 
working together to develop high-performance compute solutions 
based on the IBM POWER architecture. 
Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients 
to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital 
information. These solutions address critical client requirements 
for information retention and archiving, security, compliance and 
storage optimization including data deduplication, availability and 
virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of software 
defined storage solutions, disk and tape storage systems and 
Flash storage and solutions.


===== PAGE 32 =====
31
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Technology: the company’s continued leadership in systems 
requires ongoing investments in semiconductor and material 
science research and development that drives innovation that mat-
ters for our clients. In 2014, the company announced a definitive 
agreement to divest its Microelectronics business and manufac-
turing operations. This transaction is expected to close in 2015.
Global Financing facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of information 
technology systems, software and services by providing financ-
ing solutions in the areas where the company has the expertise. 
The financing arrangements are predominantly for products or 
services that are critical to the end users’ business operations. 
These financing contracts are entered into after a comprehensive 
credit evaluation and are secured by legal contracts. As a captive 
financier, Global Financing has the benefit of both deep knowledge 
of its client base and a clear insight into the products and services 
financed. These factors allow the business to effectively manage 
two of the major risks, credit and residual value, associated with 
financing while generating strong returns on equity. Global Financ-
ing also maintains a long term partnership with the companies’ 
clients through various stages of IT asset life cycle—from initial 
purchase and technology upgrades to asset disposition decisions.
Global Financing Capabilities
Client Financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal 
clients for terms up to seven years. Assets financed are primarily IT 
products and services where the company has expertise. Internal 
financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ long-term 
client service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected 
portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily for cash 
management purposes. All internal financing arrangements are at 
arm’s-length rates and are based upon market conditions.
Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts 
receivable financing to dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM 
products. 
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: used equipment is returned 
from lease transactions, or may be surplus equipment inter-
nally or externally purchased. These assets may be refurbished 
or upgraded and sold or leased to new or existing clients both 
externally or internally. Externally remarketed equipment reve-
nue represents sales or leases to clients and resellers. Internally 
remarketed equipment revenue primarily represents used equip-
ment that is sold internally to Systems and Technology and Global 
Services. Systems and Technology may also sell the equipment 
that it purchases from Global Financing to external clients.
IBM Worldwide Organizations
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s deliv-
ery of value to its clients:
•	 Sales and Distribution
•	 Research, Development and Intellectual Property
•	 Integrated Supply Chain
Sales and Distribution
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than 175 
countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribu-
tion of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution organization 
manages the IBM global footprint, with dedicated country-based 
operating units focused on delivering unique value and superior 
experiences for clients. Within these units, client relationship 
professionals work with integrated teams of consultants, prod-
uct specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to enable clients’ 
business growth and innovation. These teams deliver value by 
understanding the clients’ businesses and needs, and then bring 
together capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network of 
Business Partners to develop and implement solutions.
	
By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s 
geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for 
local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and 
timely investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic 
units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas. 
IBM extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by 
leveraging industry skills with marketing, Inside Sales and local 
Business Partner resources.
	
The company continues to invest to capture the long-term 
opportunity in key growth markets around the world—China, India 
and countries within Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle 
East, Africa and Latin America. The company’s major markets 
include the G7 countries of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, 
the United States (U.S.) and the United Kingdom (UK) plus Austria, 
the Bahamas, Belgium, the Caribbean region, Cyprus, Denmark, 
Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Malta, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differentiate the 
company from its competitors. IBM annually invests approximately 
6 percent of total revenue for R&D, focusing on high-growth, 
high-value opportunities. IBM Research works with clients and 
the company’s business units through global labs on near-term 
and mid-term innovations. It contributes many new technologies 
to IBM’s portfolio every year and helps clients address their most 
difficult challenges. IBM Research also explores the boundaries of 
science and technology—from nanotechnology to future systems, 
big data analytics, secure clouds and to IBM Watson, a ‘‘cognitive’’ 
learning system. 
	
IBM Research also focuses on differentiating IBM’s services 
businesses, providing new capabilities and solutions. It has the 
world’s largest mathematics department of any public company, 
enabling IBM to create unique analytic solutions and actively 
engage with clients on their toughest challenges.
	
In February 2015, the company announced a new IBM Research 
lab to be located in South Africa. This will be IBM Research’s 13th 
global lab.


===== PAGE 33 =====
32
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
In 2014, IBM was awarded more U.S. patents than any other 
company for the 22nd consecutive year. IBM’s 7,534 patents 
awarded in 2014 represent a diverse range of inventions poised 
to enable significant innovations that will position the company to 
compete and lead in the emerging opportunities represented by 
cloud, big data and analytics, security, social and mobile. These 
inventions also will advance the new era of cognitive systems 
where machines will learn, reason and interact with people in more 
natural ways. It was the most U.S. patents ever awarded to one 
company in a single year.
	
The company continues to actively seek intellectual property 
(IP) protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on 
other initiatives designed to leverage its IP leadership. Some of 
IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM 
products, while others are licensed and may be used in IBM prod-
ucts and/or the products of the licensee. While the company’s 
various proprietary IP rights are important to its success, IBM 
believes its business as a whole is not materially dependent on 
any particular patent or license, or any particular group of patents 
or licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a number of patents, 
which vary in duration, relating to its products.
Integrated Supply Chain
IBM has an extensive integrated supply chain, procuring materials 
and services globally. In 2014, the company also managed approxi-
mately $21.8 billion in procurement spending for its clients through 
the Global Process Services organization. The supply, manufactur-
ing and logistics operations are integrated in one operating unit 
that has optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and streamlin-
ing internal processes has improved sales force productivity and 
operational effectiveness and efficiency. Supply chain resiliency 
enables IBM to reduce its risk during marketplace changes. 
	
The company continues to derive business value from its own 
globally integrated supply chain providing a strategic advantage 
for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages its supply 
chain expertise for clients through its supply chain business trans-
formation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate clients’ 
end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement to logistics.
Utilizing analytics, mobile, cloud and social—with numerous proj-
ects, has allowed the integrated supply chain to drive positive 
business outcomes for the company and its clients.


===== PAGE 34 =====
33
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2014 versus 2013 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s 
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect 
an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items; see note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 145 to 
150 for additional information.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$37,130
$38,551 
(3.7)%
1.6%*
Gross margin
38.3%
38.1%
0.2 pts.
Global Business Services
17,825
18,396
(3.1)%
(1.1)%
Gross margin
30.8%
30.9%
0.0 pts.
Software
25,434
25,932
(1.9)%
(0.9)%
Gross margin
88.6%
88.8%
(0.2) pts.
Systems and Technology
9,996
12,988
(23.0)%
(16.8)%*
Gross margin
39.5%
40.8%
(1.3) pts.
Global Financing
2,034
2,022
0.6%
3.0%
Gross margin
49.4%
45.6%
3.7 pts.
Other
374
478
(21.7)%
(20.4)%
Gross margin
(215.0)%
(195.6)%
(19.4) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$92,793
$98,367 
(5.7)%
(1.5)%*
Total consolidated gross profit
$46,407
$48,684
(4.7)%
Total consolidated gross margin
50.0%
49.5%
0.5 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
416
388
7.2%
Acquisition-related charges
—
5
(100.0)%
Retirement-related costs/(income)
173
629
(72.4)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$46,996
$49,706
(5.5)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
50.6%
50.5%
0.1 pts.
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.


===== PAGE 35 =====
34
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
In 2014, the Global Services segments, Global Technology Services 
(GTS) and Global Business Services (GBS), delivered revenue of 
$54,954 million, a decrease of 3.5 percent as reported, but an 
increase of 1 percent adjusted for the divestitures of the customer 
care and industry standard server businesses (2 points) and cur-
rency (2 points). Pre-tax income decreased 8.4 percent and the 
pre-tax margin decreased 0.8 points to 16.5 percent. Total outsourc-
ing revenue of $24,520 million decreased 6.3 percent as reported, 
but was flat year to year when adjusted for currency (2 points) and 
the divestitures (4 points). Total transactional revenue of $23,581 
million decreased 0.4 percent, but increased 2 percent adjusted 
for currency.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Global Services external revenue
$54,954
$56,947 
(3.5)%
0.7%*
Global Technology Services
$37,130
$38,551 
(3.7)%
1.6%*
Outsourcing
20,770
22,060
(5.8)
1.2*
Integrated Technology Services
9,506
9,380
1.3
3.7
Maintenance
6,853
7,111
(3.6)
(0.1)*
Global Business Services
$17,825
$18,396
(3.1)%
(1.1)%
Outsourcing
3,750
4,097
(8.5)
(6.1)
Consulting and Systems Integration
14,075
14,298
(1.6)
0.4
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Global Technology Services revenue of $37,130 million decreased 
3.7 percent as reported in 2014 compared to the prior year, but 
increased 2 percent adjusted for currency (3 points) and the dives-
titures (3 points). Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue 
grew 1.3 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 
2013. The SoftLayer platform, which provides highly differenti­ated 
solutions for clients looking to deploy across public, private or 
hybrid clouds all unified on one platform, had strong performance. 
Throughout the year, SoftLayer attracted new workloads to the 
platform and the company is investing to expand its datacenter 
footprint globally. GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 5.8 percent 
as reported in 2014, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency 
(2 points) and the divestitures (5 points). Growth was driven by 
performance from the substantial new contracts brought on during 
2013. In 2014, clients continued to sign large outsourcing engage-
ments that leverage the company’s cloud, business analytics and 
mobile solutions. Maintenance revenue decreased 3.6 percent 
but was flat year to year adjusted for the divestiture of the industry 
standard server business (1 point) and currency (2 points).
	
Global Business Services revenue of $17,825 million decreased 
3.1 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior 
year. Consulting and Systems Integration (C&SI) revenue declined 
1.6 percent as reported, but was flat adjusted for currency in 2014. 
There was strong growth in the practices that are highly differenti-
ated in the marketplace which address cloud, analytics, mobile 
and social, offset by declines in the more traditional parts of the 
portfolio, such as back office implementations. As the new offer-
ings continue to become a larger part of the portfolio they will 
contribute more meaningfully to the revenue performance. In 
July, the company announced a strategic partnership with Apple 
to deliver a new class of “enterprise ready” MobileFirst business 
applications for iOS combining mobility and analytics. In the fourth 
quarter of 2014, the first applications were launched with additional 
applications focused on healthcare, energy and utilities expected 
in the first quarter of 2015. GBS Outsourcing revenue decreased 
8.5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2014, but had 
sequential improvement in the year-to-year growth rate in the last 
two quarters of the year adjusted for currency. Throughout the 
year, performance was impacted by pricing pressure and client 
renegotiations, as well as a reduction in elective projects.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Global Services
Global Technology Services
External gross profit
$14,237
$14,691
(3.1)%
External gross profit margin
38.3%
38.1%
0.2 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  6,340
$  6,983
(9.2)%
Pre-tax margin
16.7%
17.6%
(1.0) pts.
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$  5,493
$  5,676
(3.2)%
External gross profit margin
30.8%
30.9%
0.0 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  2,999
$  3,214
(6.7)%
Pre-tax margin
16.3%
16.8%
(0.5) pts.


===== PAGE 36 =====
35
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
differentiation, such as solutions that address the strategic imper-
atives, there was good growth and gross margin performance. 
However, in the more traditional parts of the portfolio, there was 
continued price and profit pressure. The company will continue 
to invest in the strategic imperatives and accelerate the transi-
tion to global delivery. Additionally, Global Process Services, the 
business process outsourcing business, will be integrated with 
GBS beginning in 2015 to create a seamless end-to-end business 
transformation capability for clients.
Global Services Backlog
The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2014 
was $128 billion. This included a backlog reduction in 2014 of $3.7 
billion associated with the customer care and industry standard 
server divestitures. Adjusting for the divested businesses, backlog 
was down 7.5 percent as reported, but flat adjusted for currency 
year to year. The estimated transactional backlog at December 
31, 2014 decreased 7.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) 
from the December 31, 2013 levels. The estimated outsourcing 
backlog decreased 11.0 percent as reported, but increased 1 per-
cent adjusted for the customer care divestiture (4 points) and 
currency (8 points).
($ in billions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for
Currency
Backlog
Total backlog
$128.4
$142.8
(10.1)%
(2.9)%
Adjusted for divested businesses
(7.5)
(0.2)
Outsourcing backlog
80.8
90.8
(11.0)
(3.3)
Adjusted for customer care
(7.1)
0.8
GTS gross profit margin increased 0.2 points to 38.3 percent in 
2014. Pre-tax income decreased 9.2 percent to $6,340 million and 
the pre-tax margin declined 1.0 points to 16.7 percent compared 
to the prior year. While there was a benefit from the pre-tax gain 
of $202 million related to the customer care divestiture in 2014, 
this benefit was offset by investments in areas like new resil-
iency centers, additional security skills and the SoftLayer cloud 
hub expansion, plus the lost profit from the divested businesses. 
Overall, the profit performance in GTS reflects the actions that 
the company has taken to transform the business. The company 
has invested in its strategic imperatives to accelerate growth, 
continued to optimize its delivery platform through workforce 
rebalancing and broader use of automation, and divested busi-
nesses, all impacting the year-to-year results. While these actions 
all have near-term impacts to profit, they position the business 
more effectively going forward and will enable it to deliver more 
value to clients. 
	
GBS gross profit margin of 30.8 percent was flat year to 
year compared to 2013. Pre-tax income decreased 6.7 percent 
to $2,999 million and the pre-tax margin declined 0.5 points to 
16.3 percent. In 2014, profit was impacted by lower revenue on a 
relatively fixed cost base. In areas where the company has strong 
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, 
GBS Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Main-
tenance. Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS 
Outsourcing. Transactional backlog includes ITS and Consulting 
and Systems Integration. Total backlog is intended to be a state-
ment of overall work under contract and therefore does include 
Maintenance. Backlog estimates are subject to change and are 
affected by several factors, including terminations, changes in the 
scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustments for revenue 
not materialized and adjustments for currency.
	
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of 
the value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services con-
tract. There are no third-party standards or requirements governing 
the calculation of signings. The calculation used by management 
involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s 
commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement, 
and the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
	
Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and 
Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract exten-
sions and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the 
extent of the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included 
in signings as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, 
where revenues equal renewals.
	
Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as 
positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the 
company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be 
recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or 
coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.


===== PAGE 37 =====
36
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software revenue of $25,434 million decreased 1.9 percent (1 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. 
Middleware decreased 0.4 percent (increased 1 percent adjusted 
for currency) while operating systems were down 13.4 percent 
(13 percent adjusted for currency). The decline in operating sys-
tems impacted total software revenue growth year to year at 
constant currency by approximately 1 point. The company had 
solid growth in many of its solution areas, including security, mobile 
and cloud. In addition, across the software brands, software-as-
a-service (SaaS) offerings grew rapidly throughout the year, 
increasing approximately 50 percent compared to 2013. In the first 
quarter of 2014, the company launched Bluemix, a cloud platform-
as-a-service for the enterprise and, during the year, the Software 
business completed five acquisitions adding to its capabilities 
in mobile, cloud and security. Across Software, the company is 
transitioning its portfolio to capture growth areas while continuing 
to drive innovation in its core franchises. It is growing and build-
ing capabilities in emerging areas like SaaS, mobile and security. 
Performance in 2014 reflected business model changes that 
impacted the transactional revenue growth. Given clients’ sub-
stantial investment in the IBM software platform, the company has 
been providing more flexibility on how clients deploy its software 
acquired through enterprise licensing agreements. This enables 
clients to more effectively manage their capacity and commit to 
the company’s platforms for the long term, however, it does impact 
period transactional revenue. 
	
Key branded middleware revenue, which accounted for 
67 percent of total Software revenue in 2014, decreased 1.3 per-
cent (flat percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior 
year. While there was growth in several strategic areas like cloud, 
mobile and security, other parts of the portfolio declined on a 
year-to-year basis. 
	
WebSphere revenue increased 2.7 percent (4 percent ad­justed 
for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Revenue per-
formance was driven by growth in Application Server, Business 
Integration and Commerce offerings. In Commerce, there was 
strong momentum in Commerce-as-a-service, which includes the 
acquisitions of Silverpop and Aspera. MobileFirst, the comprehen-
sive portfolio of mobile software and services that enable clients 
to manage, integrate and leverage mobile devices, contributed to 
the significant growth of the company’s mobile business. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total signings
$51,569
$63,203
(18.4)%
(15.7)%
Outsourcing signings
$26,517
$35,027
(24.3)%
(21.1)%
Transactional signings
25,052
28,176
(11.1)
(8.9)
Software
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Software external revenue
$25,434
$25,932 
(1.9)%
(0.9)%
Middleware
$21,474
$21,557 
(0.4)%
0.6%
Key Branded Middleware
17,098
17,322
(1.3)
(0.2)
WebSphere Family
2.7
3.5
Information Management
(4.1)
(3.0)
Workforce Solutions
(6.1)
(5.1)
Tivoli
2.0
3.0
Rational
(3.3)
(1.3)
Other middleware
4,376
4,235
3.3
4.2
Operating systems
2,119
2,447
(13.4)
(12.6)
Other
1,841
1,929
(4.5)
(3.7)


===== PAGE 38 =====
37
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Software
External gross profit
$22,533
$23,032
(2.2)%
External gross profit margin
88.6%
88.8%
(0.2) pts.
Pre-tax income
$10,699
$11,106
(3.7)%
Pre-tax margin
37.0%
38.1%
(1.2) pts.
Software gross profit decreased 2.2 percent, with a gross profit 
margin of 88.6 percent. Software pre-tax income decreased 
3.7 percent year to year and pre-tax margin declined 1.2 points. 
Across software, the company continues to drive innovation and 
capture growth areas, integrating analytics and security capabili-
ties that are needed to operate seamlessly in a hybrid environment. 
For example, the company is introducing several new offerings 
that further enable its analytics portfolio in a cloud environment. 
It recently announced IBM Verse, a cloud based email and col-
laboration offering that integrates Watson capabilities. This type of 
continued innovation in offerings, together with expanding services 
on the Bluemix platform-as-a-service, will better allow customers 
to move to a hybrid environment.
	
Information Management revenue decreased 4.1 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior 
year. With the acquisition of Cloudant, the company has added 
database-as-a-service capability. Cloudant extends the com-
pany’s mobile and cloud platforms by enabling developers to 
easily and quickly create next-generation mobile and Web-based 
applications. 
	
Workforce Solutions revenue decreased 6.1 percent (5 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Perfor-
mance has been impacted by the transition from on premise Notes 
to SaaS offerings. The company is working to transform this busi-
ness and build recurring revenue streams from the SaaS offerings.
	
Tivoli revenue increased 2.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Year-to-year revenue 
growth was driven by security software, which grew at double 
digit rates again this year. As cybersecurity threats are a key issue 
faced by all customers, these strong results are being driven in 
part by incremental requirements for security with the expansion 
into cloud and mobile computing.
	
Rational revenue decreased 3.3 percent (1 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2014 year over year.
	
Operating systems revenue decreased 13.4 percent (13 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to 2013. This decline was 
primarily driven by declines in Power Systems.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue
$9,996
$12,988
(23.0)%
(16.8)%*
System z
(23.3)%
(22.6)%
Power Systems
(18.9)
(18.2)
Storage
(12.0)
(11.0)
System x
(35.1)
(34.9)
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Systems and Technology (STG) revenue of $9,996 million 
decreased 23.0 percent as reported in 2014, 17 percent adjusted 
for the divestiture of the industry standard server business 
(5 points) and currency (1 point). In 2013, the STG business reported 
a profit decline of $1,653 million compared to 2012. During 2014, the 
company worked to reposition this business and to stabilize profit. 
It divested the industry standard server business and announced 
the divestiture of the Microelectronics business. Performance in 
2014 reflected year-to-year declines related to the System z prod-
uct cycle as well as declines in Power Systems and Storage. STG 
grew profit in the fourth quarter, and was profitable for the year. 
Profit performance year to year was impacted by the divestiture 
and currency, in addition to the revenue impacts. 
	
System z revenue decreased 23.3 percent (23 percent ad­justed 
for currency) compared to the prior year. The fourth quarter of 2014 
marked the tenth quarter of the current product cycle. In Janu-
ary 2015, the company announced the z13, the new generation 
mainframe. The z13 system culminates a billion dollar investment 
and five years of development, leverages the innovation of more 
than 500 new patents and represents a collaboration with more 
than 60 clients. The result of this effort is a mainframe that has the 
world’s fastest processor that can execute two-and-a-half billion 
transactions a day. With this generation of mainframe, the com-
pany has dramatically enhanced its capabilities around analytics, 


===== PAGE 39 =====
38
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
mobile, security and cloud to address the needs clients see in 
their businesses. These capabilities span from real-time insights 
to real-time fraud detection in a system that can consistently run 
at 100-percent utilization with 100-percent uptime. The company 
continues to innovate on the platform to address client needs and 
extend its leadership in high-end systems, a core franchise that 
has nearly doubled in installed capacity over the last five years.
	
Power Systems revenue decreased 18.9 percent (18 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Although 
down year to year, there was sequential improvement in the year-
to-year revenue growth rate at constant currency in the last two 
quarters of the year. The company has repositioned Power which is 
not only a systems business, but also an open chip processor and 
an IP income opportunity through the OpenPOWER foundation. In 
June, scale-out systems based on POWER8 were introduced and 
high-end POWER8-based enterprise systems were announced in 
October. These newly announced systems are highly scalable and 
can handle the most data intensive, mission critical applications 
in the industry. In addition, the company saw continued expan-
sion of the OpenPOWER consortium, now with over 80 members, 
14 of which are in greater China. Since the establishment of the 
consortium a year ago, several offerings have been introduced 
by consortium members based on the POWER architecture. In 
addition, the company has initiated a strategic partnership with 
Suzhou PowerCore, which intends to use POWER architecture to 
develop and market processors for servers in China.
	
Storage revenue decreased 12.0 percent (11 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. However, at 
constant currency, it delivered sequential improvement in the 
year-to-year growth rate over the last three quarters of 2014. Full- 
year performance included strong contribution from FlashSystem 
and the Storwize portfolio. However, this was more than offset by 
weakness in high-end disk and the continued wind-down of the 
legacy storage-related OEM business.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Systems and Technology
External gross profit
$3,945
$5,299 
(25.6)%
External gross profit margin
39.5%
40.8%
(1.3) pts.
Pre-tax income
$     34
$   213 
(84.1)%
Pre-tax margin
0.3%
1.6%
(1.3) pts.
Systems and Technology’s gross profit margin of 39.5 percent 
decreased 1.3 points versus the prior year. The decrease was 
driven by lower margins in Power Systems (1.3 points) and Storage 
(0.9 points), partially offset by an increase due to mix (0.7 points), 
driven by the divestiture of the industry standard server business. 
Pre-tax income decreased $179 million or 84.1 percent and pre-tax 
margin decreased 1.3 points in 2014 versus the prior year. 
	
In 2014, the company took significant actions to reposition 
its Systems and Technology business for higher value, and rein-
forced its commitment to driving innovation in high-end systems 
and storage. It repositioned Power through the development of 
the POWER8 systems which are built for cloud and big data, 
and it made available the POWER8 architecture through the 
OpenPOWER consortium to build an open ecosystem and an IP 
opportunity. The company is divesting its Microelectronics busi-
ness with future chip supply coming from an at-scale provider, 
and has committed $3 billion of investment over five years in the 
next era of chip technology as it strengthens its semiconductor 
research and development and systems innovation. The company 
also divested System x, the industry standard server business, 
and announced the z13, the new generation of the mainframe. 
With its portfolio repositioned and the introduction of the new 
mainframe, this business segment should now see profit lever-
age going forward.
Global Financing
See pages 73 through 77 for an analysis of Global Financing’s seg-
ment results.


===== PAGE 40 =====
39
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total geographic revenue of $92,326 million decreased 5.6 per-
cent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) 
and currency (2 points) in 2014 compared to the prior year. In total, 
major market countries decreased 4.3 percent as reported and 
1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and currency (1 point). 
Growth market countries decreased 9.9 percent as reported 
and 3 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency 
(4 points) compared to 2013. 
	
The year-to-year decline in growth markets revenue adjusted 
for currency and the divestitures reflected growth in the Latin Amer-
ican and Europe growth markets, more than offset by decreased 
revenue in the Asia Pacific growth markets. The Latin American 
growth market countries decreased 1.0 percent as reported, but 
grew 8 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and currency 
(7 points). Within Latin America, Brazil decreased 3.1 percent as 
reported, but grew 4 percent adjusted for divestitures (1 point) 
and currency (6 points). There was also growth in most other 
Latin American countries at constant currency. European growth 
markets were down 5.3 percent as reported, but increased 1 per-
cent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency (3 points) 
compared to the prior year. Asia Pacific growth market countries 
decreased 14.6 percent as reported and 9 percent adjusted for 
divestitures (3 points) and currency (2 points). This performance 
was driven by China and several of the other larger growth market 
countries. China decreased 17.2 percent as reported and 15 per-
cent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency (0 points), but 
reflected improvement in its sequential year-to-year growth rate 
in the last quarter of the year with strong software performance 
and several large mainframe transactions. In the fourth quarter, 
China revenue decreased 19.9 percent as reported, but declined 
1 percent adjusted for currency and divestitures. Australia, India 
and Korea, which are some of the larger countries within the Asia 
Pacific growth markets, also declined compared to the prior year. 
Within the BRIC countries, combined revenue decreased 10.7 per-
cent as reported and 5 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) 
and currency (3 points) compared to the prior year. On an adjusted 
basis, this performance reflects growth in Brazil and Russia, more 
than offset by the declines in China and India.
	
Americas revenue of $41,410 million decreased 4.3 percent as 
reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and 
currency (1 point) compared to the prior year. On an adjusted 
basis, there was increased revenue in the growth markets offset 
by year-to-year declines in the major market countries. Within the 
North American major markets, the U.S. declined 4.0 percent as 
reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points). Canada 
was down 9.8 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for 
divestitures (1 point) and currency (7 points).
	
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue of $30,700 mil-
lion decreased 2.9 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted 
for divestitures (3 points) and offset by currency (1 point). Major 
market countries were down 2.6 percent as reported and 1 per-
cent adjusted for divestitures (2 points), offset by currency (1 point). 
This was offset by growth of 1 percent on an adjusted basis in the 
growth market countries. Major market performance adjusted for 
the divestitures and currency included growth in Germany, Italy 
and Spain, which was more than offset by declines in the UK and 
France compared to the prior year.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis. 
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency*
Total revenue
$92,793
$98,367 
(5.7)%
(1.5)%
Geographies
$92,326
$97,800 
(5.6)%
(1.5)%
Americas
41,410
43,249
(4.3)
(0.8)
Europe/Middle East/Africa
30,700
31,628
(2.9)
(0.6)
Asia Pacific
20,216
22,923
(11.8)
(4.1)
Major markets
(4.3)%
(1.0)%
Growth markets
(9.9)%
(3.2)%
BRIC countries
(10.7)%
(4.5)%
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.


===== PAGE 41 =====
40
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Asia Pacific revenue of $20,216 million decreased 11.8 percent 
as reported and 4 percent adjusted for the divested businesses 
(3 points) and currency (5 points). Japan was down 7.6 percent 
as reported, but increased 3 percent adjusted for divestitures 
(3 points) and currency (8 points). On this basis, Japan reflected 
year-to-year growth in every quarter of 2014. However, this growth 
was more than offset by declines in the Asia Pacific growth markets.
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$26,421
$28,440
(7.1)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(374)
(370)
1.2
Acquisition-related charges
(12)
(40)
(70.0)
Non-operating retirement-related  
(costs)/income
(180)
(433)
(58.4)
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$25,855
$27,597
(6.3)%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
28.5%
28.9%
(0.4) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
27.9%
28.1%
(0.2) pts.
The key drivers of the year-to-year change in total expense and 
other (income) were approximately:
	
	
Total 	
Operating 
	
	
Consolidated 	
 (non-GAAP)
•	 Currency* 	
(1)	 point	
(1)	 point
•	 Acquisitions**	
2	 points	
2	 points
•	 Base expense	
(8)	points	
(7)	points
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is 
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges. 
Base expense includes the gains from the divestitures of the indus-
try standard server and customer care businesses, as well as the 
impact of higher workforce rebalancing charges year to year. 
Excluding the gains from the divested businesses and the impact 
of workforce rebalancing, operating (non-GAAP) base expense 
decreased 3 points year to year versus the 7 point as reported 
decrease. Within base expense, the company is continuing to shift 
its resources and spending to the strategic imperatives. 
	
For additional information regarding total expense and other 
(income) for both expense presentations, see the following analy-
ses by category.
Selling, General and Administrative
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and  
administrative  expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$18,532
$19,178 
(3.4)%
Advertising and promotional expense
1,307
1,294
1.1
Workforce rebalancing charges
1,472
1,031
42.7
Retirement-related costs
811
986
(17.8)
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
374
370
1.2
Stock-based compensation
350
435
(19.4)
Bad debt expense
334
156
113.8
Total consolidated selling, general  
and administrative expense
$23,180
$23,451
(1.2)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(374)
(370)
1.2
Acquisition-related charges
(11)
(25)
(54.1)
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(257)
(376)
(31.7)
Operating (non-GAAP)  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$22,537
$22,680
(0.6)%
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense 
decreased 1.2 percent in 2014 versus 2013. The decrease was 
primarily driven by the effects of currency (2 points) and lower base 
expense (1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spend-
ing (2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 
0.6 percent primarily driven by the effects of currency (2 points), 
partially offset by acquisition-related spending (1 point). Workforce 
rebalancing charges in 2014 were $1,472 million, an increase of 
$440 million year to year, which resulted in a 2 point year-to-year 
impact in operating (non-GAAP) SG&A base expense. Bad debt 
expense increased $178 million year to year driven by higher spe-
cific provision additions, primarily in China and Latin America. The 
receivables provision coverage was 2.2 percent at December 31, 
2014, an increase of 60 basis points from year-end 2013.
Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated research, 
development and engineering
$5,437
$5,743
(5.3)%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related  
(costs)/income
77
(57)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) research, 
development and engineering
$5,514
$5,686
(3.0)%
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 42 =====
41
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense in 
continuing operations was 5.9 percent of revenue in 2014 and 
5.8 percent of revenue in 2013. RD&E expense decreased 5.3 per-
cent in 2014 versus 2013 primarily driven by: lower base expense 
(7 points) and the effects of currency (1 point), partially offset by 
higher expense due to acquisitions (2 points). Operating (non-
GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 3.0 percent in 2014 compared to 
the prior year, primarily driven by lower base expense (4 points) and 
the effects of currency (1 point), partially offset by higher expense 
due to acquisitions (2 points). 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Sales and other transfers  
of intellectual property
$283
$352
(19.7)%
Licensing/royalty-based fees
129
150
(13.9)
Custom development income
330
320
3.1
Total
$742
$822
(9.8)%
The timing and amount of Sales and other transfers of IP may vary 
significantly from period to period depending upon the timing of 
divestitures, economic conditions, industry consolidation and the 
timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no 
significant individual IP transactions in 2014 or 2013.
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction  
losses/(gains)
$   (599)
$(260)
130.4%
(Gains)/losses on derivative 
instruments
654
166
293.3
Interest income
(90)
(74)
22.1
Net (gains)/losses from securities  
and investment assets
(26)
(29)
(11.5)
Other
(1,878)
(137)
NM
Total consolidated other  
(income) and expense
$(1,938)
$(333)
482.4%
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related charges
(1)
(16)
(94.7)
Operating (non-GAAP)  
other (income) and expense
$(1,939)
$(349)
456.2%
NM—Not meaningful
The increase in income of $1,605 million year over year was pri-
marily driven by higher gains associated with divestitures ($1,710 
million), driven by the industry standard server ($1,400 million) and 
customer care ($202 million) transactions. Divestiture gains are 
reflected in Other in the table above.
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense
Total
$484
$402
20.4%
The increase in interest expense in 2014 versus 2013 was primar-
ily driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower 
average interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of 
financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the 
related external borrowings are to support the Global Financing 
external business. Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized 
interest) in 2014 was $1,025 million, an increase of $36 million 
year to year.
Stock-Based Compensation
Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $512 million 
decreased $102 million compared to 2013. The decrease was pri-
marily related to performance share units ($58 million), restricted 
stock units ($26 million) and the company’s assumption of stock-
based awards previously issued by acquired entities ($18 million). 
Stock-based compensation cost, and the year-to-year change, 
was reflected in the following categories: Cost: $121 million, down 
$1 million; SG&A expense: $350 million, down $85 million; RD&E 
expense: $54 million, down $3 million and Other (income) and 
expense: ($13 million), down $13 million. The amount of stock-
based compensation cost included in the loss from discontinued 
operations, net of tax, was immaterial.


===== PAGE 43 =====
42
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Retirement-Related Plans 
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement-
related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) 
relating to the job function of the plan participants.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Retirement-related plans—cost
Service cost
$    482
$    545
(11.5)%
Amortization of prior  
service cost/(credits)
(114)
(114)
(0.1)
Cost of defined contribution plans
1,253
1,384
(9.5)
Total operating costs
$ 1,621
$ 1,815
(10.7)%
Interest cost
3,994
3,728
7.1
Expected return on plan assets
(6,351)
(6,187)
2.7
Recognized actuarial losses
2,467
3,434
(28.2)
Plan amendments/curtailments/ 
settlements
25
0
NM
Multi-employer plan/other costs
218
86
154.5
Total non-operating costs/
(income)
$    353
$ 1,062
(66.7)%
Total retirement-related  
plans—cost
$ 1,974
$ 2,876
(31.4)%
NM—Not meaningful
In 2014, total retirement-related plan cost decreased by $902 
million compared to 2013, primarily driven by a decrease in rec-
ognized actuarial losses ($967 million), higher actual return on plan 
assets ($165 million) and lower defined contribution plans cost 
($131 million), partially offset by higher interest cost ($266 million) 
and higher pension obligations related to litigation ($139 million). 
	
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section 
on page 22, the company characterizes certain retirement-related 
costs as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing this char-
acterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2014 were $1,621 
million, a decrease of $194 million compared to 2013, primarily 
driven by lower defined contribution plans cost ($131 million) and 
decreased service cost ($63 million). Non-operating costs of $353 
million decreased $709 million in 2014, compared to the prior year, 
driven primarily by the decrease in recognized actuarial losses 
($967 million) and higher actual return on plan assets ($165 million), 
partially offset by higher interest cost ($266 million) and higher 
pension obligations related to litigation ($139 million). 
Income Taxes
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2014 was 21.2 per-
cent, an increase of 4.6 points versus the prior year, driven by the 
following factors:
•	 The year-to-year impact of factors that benefited the 2013 
rate (14.5 points), including completion of the U.S. 2008–2010 
tax audit and the associated reserve redeterminations 
(11.1 points), the retroactive impact of the 2012 American  
Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points), a tax agreement which 
required a reassessment of certain valuation allowances on 
deferred tax assets (1.4 points), the resolution of certain  
non-U.S. tax audits (0.7 points) and newly enacted U.S. state 
tax legislation (0.6 points); and
•	 A tax charge related to the sale of the industry standard 
server business (0.9 points); partially offset by; 
•	 A year-to-year benefit of reduced tax charges related to  
certain intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries 
and the intercompany licensing of certain IP (3.7 points);
•	 An increased benefit in the utilization of foreign tax credits 
(4.7 points); and
•	 A benefit due to a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax 
income in 2014 (2.5 points).
The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate 
was 21.0 percent, an increase of 4.0 points versus 2013 principally 
driven by the same factors described above.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the 
weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstand-
ing during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on 
the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common 
stock outstanding plus the effect of dilutive potential common 
shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock 
method. Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding 
stock options and stock awards.
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Earnings per share of common stock  
from continuing operations
Assuming dilution
$15.59
$15.30
1.9%
Basic
$15.68
$15.42
1.7%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) 
$16.53
$16.64
(0.7)%
Weighted-average shares  
outstanding (in millions)
Assuming dilution
1,010.0
1,103.0
(8.4)%
Basic
1,004.3
1,094.5
(8.2)%


===== PAGE 44 =====
43
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2014 and 2013 were 
990.5 million and 1,054.4 million, respectively. The average number 
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 93.0 million 
shares lower in 2014 versus 2013. The decrease was primarily the 
result of the common stock repurchase program.
Results of Discontinued Operations
The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $3.7 bil-
lion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013. The loss in 2014 included a 
non-recurring pre-tax charge of $4.7 billion, or $3.4 billion, net of 
tax. The charge included an impairment to reflect the fair value 
less estimated costs to sell the Microelectronics business, which 
the company initially reported as held for sale at September 30, 
2014. The charge also included other estimated costs related 
to the transaction, including cash consideration expected to be 
transferred of approximately $1.5 billion. The cash consideration is 
expected to be paid over the next three years and will be adjusted 
down by the amount of the working capital due from GLOBAL-
FOUNDRIES, estimated to be $0.2 billion. In addition, discontinued 
operations includes the operational net losses from the Microelec-
tronics business of $0.3 billion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013. The 
discontinued operations effective tax rate in 2014 was 30.2 per-
cent compared to 44.8 percent in 2013. The year-to-year decrease 
in the rate was driven primarily by a one-time tax charge of $428 
million in the third quarter of 2014 in connection with the disposal.
	
See note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 100 and 101 
for additional information regarding the divestiture transaction.
Financial Position
Dynamics
At December 31, 2014, the company continued to have the finan-
cial flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash and 
marketable securities at year end were $8,476 million. During the 
year, the company continued to manage the investment portfolio 
to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives. 
	
Total debt of $40,804 million increased $1,087 million from 
prior year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at Decem-
ber 31, 2014, was $650 million, a decrease of $1,808 million from 
the prior year end. Within total debt, $29,103 million is in support 
of the Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 
ratio. The company continues to have substantial flexibility in the 
market. During 2014, the company completed bond issuances 
totaling $6,852 million, with terms ranging from 2 to 10 years, and 
interest rates ranging from 0.30 to 3.63 percent depending on 
maturity. The company has consistently generated strong cash 
flow from operations and continues to have access to additional 
sources of liquidity through the capital markets and its $10 billion 
global credit facility, with 100 percent of the facility available on a 
same day basis.
	
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remea-
sures the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans 
at December 31. At December 31, 2014, the overall net under-
funded position was $16,932 million, an increase of $5,498 million 
from December 31, 2013 driven by a decrease in discount rates 
and changes in U.S. mortality rate assumptions, partially offset 
by strong asset returns worldwide. At year end, the company’s 
qualified defined benefit plans were well funded and the cash 
requirements related to these plans remain stable going forward 
at approximately $600 million per year through 2019. In 2014, the 
return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets was 10.1 percent 
and the plan was 102 percent funded at December 31. Overall, 
global asset returns were 12.2 percent and the qualified defined 
benefit plans worldwide were 97 percent funded at December 31.
	
During 2014, the company generated $16,868 million in cash 
from operations, a decrease of $616 million compared to 2013. In 
addition, the company generated $12,372 million in free cash flow, 
a decrease of $2,649 million versus the prior year. See pages 66 
to 67 for additional information on free cash flow. The company 
returned $17,944 million to shareholders in 2014, with $13,679 mil-
lion in gross share repurchases and $4,265 million in dividends. In 
2014, the company repurchased approximately 71.5 million shares 
and had approximately $6.3 billion remaining in share repurchase 
authorization at year end. The company’s cash generation permits 
the company to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most 
attractive long-term opportunities.
	
The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing 
business are a significant part of the company’s financial posi-
tion. The financial position amounts appearing on page 82 are the 
consolidated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts 
appearing in the separate Global Financing section, beginning on 
page 73, are supplementary data presented to facilitate an under-
standing of the Global Financing business.
Working Capital
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Current assets
$49,422
$51,350
Current liabilities
39,600
40,154
Working capital
$  9,822
$11,196
Current ratio
1.25:1
1.28:1
Working capital decreased $1,374 million from the year-end 2013 
position. The key changes are described below:
	
Current assets decreased $1,928 million (an increase of $1,119 
million adjusted for currency), as a result of:
•	 A decrease of $2,589 million in cash and cash equivalents 
and marketable securities; and
•	 A decline of $1,375 million ($734 million adjusted for currency) 
in trade receivables primarily due to the decline in revenue 
and improved customer collections; partially offset by


===== PAGE 45 =====
44
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
•	 An increase of $1,322 million ($1,378 million adjusted for  
currency) in other receivables driven by anticipated tax 
refunds; and
•	 An increase in deferred taxes of $394 million ($507 million 
adjusted for currency) primarily due to the expected Micro-
electronics business divestiture.
Current liabilities decreased $554 million (an increase of $1,623 
million adjusted for currency), as a result of:
•	 A decrease in short-term debt of $1,131 million ($1,074 million 
adjusted for currency); and 
•	 A decrease in deferred income of $680 million (an increase of 
$42 million adjusted for currency) driven by currency; partially 
offset by
•	 Other accrued expenses and liabilities increases of $1,265 
million ($1,840 million adjusted for currency) driven by 
charges and expected payments related to the expected 
divestiture of the Microelectronics business and workforce 
rebalancing accruals.
Cash Flow
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financ-
ing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash 
Flows on page 83 are summarized in the table below. These 
amounts include the cash flows associated with the Global Financ-
ing business.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Net cash provided by/(used in) continuing 
operations
Operating activities
$ 16,868
$17,485
Investing activities
(3,001)
(7,326)
Financing activities
(15,452)
(9,883)
Effect of exchange rate changes on  
cash and cash equivalents
(655)
28
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
$  (2,240)
$     304
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $616 mil-
lion in 2014 driven by the following key factors:
•	 An increase in income taxes paid of $1,724 million primarily 
driven by audit settlement payments and other prior period 
discrete tax impacts settled in 2014; 
•	 A decrease in cash associated with deferred income of $814 
million due to lower levels of customer prepayments; and 
•	 Performance-related declines within net income; partially 
offset by 
•	 An increase in cash provided by receivables of $2,676 million, 
primarily driven by financing receivables; and 
•	 A decrease in cash payments for performance-related com-
pensation of $772 million.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $4,325 million 
driven by:
•	 A decrease in cash used for acquisitions of $2,401 million; and
•	 An increase in cash provided by divestitures of $2,061 million.
Net cash used in financing activities increased $5,569 million as 
compared to the prior year driven by the following factors:
•	 Lower cash from debt transactions (including short-term 
borrowings) of $5,177 million; and 
•	 An increase of $392 million in net cash used for equity trans-
actions impacted by increased dividend payments in 2014. 
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Noncurrent assets
$68,110
$74,873
Long-term debt
$35,073
$32,856
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt)
$30,844
$30,284
The decrease in noncurrent assets of $6,763 million ($3,790 million 
adjusted for currency) was driven by:
•	 A decrease of $3,392 million ($3,260 million adjusted for  
currency) in prepaid pension assets primarily driven by plan 
remeasurements; 
•	 A decrease in property, plant and equipment, net of $3,050 
million ($2,381 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven 
by a charge of $2,358 million associated with the expected 
divestiture of the Microelectronics business; and 
•	 A decrease of $1,646 million ($917 million adjusted for cur-
rency) in long term financing receivables; partially offset by 
•	 An increase in deferred taxes of $1,757 million ($2,054 million 
adjusted for currency) driven by retirement related plan activity.
Long-term debt increased $2,218 million ($3,042 million adjusted 
for currency) driven by new debt of $7,657 million offset by 
reclasses to short-term debt of $4,809 million.
	
Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, increased $561 mil-
lion ($2,330 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
•	 An increase in retirement and nonpension benefit obligations 
of $2,019 million ($3,210 million adjusted for currency) driven 
by plan remeasurements, partially offset by 
•	 Declines of $1,041 million ($708 million adjusted for currency) 
in other liabilities driven by declines in deferred taxes.
Debt
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored 
and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liabil-
ity profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility 
to access global funding sources as needed. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
45
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2014:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$46,407
$ 416
$ 173
$46,996
Gross profit margin
50.0%
0.4 pts.
0.2 pts.
50.6%
SG&A
$23,180
$(385)
$(257)
$22,537
RD&E
5,437
—
77
5,514
Other (income) and expense
(1,938)
(1)
—
(1,939)
Total expense and other (income)
26,421
(386)
(180)
25,855
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
19,986
803
353
21,142
Pre-tax income margin from continuing operations
21.5%
0.9  pts.
0.4 pts.
22.8%
Provision for income taxes*
$  4,234
$ 133
$   73
$  4,440
Effective tax rate
21.2%
(0.2) pts.
0.0 pts.
21.0%
Income from continuing operations
$15,751
$ 670
$ 280
$16,702
Income margin from continuing operations
17.0%
0.7 pts.
0.3 pts.
18.0%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$ (3,729)
—
$    —
$ (3,729)
Net income
$12,022
$ 670
$ 280
$12,973
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations
$  15.59
$0.66
$0.28
$  16.53
Discontinued operations
$   (3.69)
$   —
$   —
$   (3.69)
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effec-
tive tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Total company debt
$40,804
$39,718
Total Global Financing segment debt
$29,103
$27,504
Debt to support external clients
25,531
24,471
Debt to support internal clients
3,572
3,033
Non-Global Financing debt
11,701
12,214
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract 
by other IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services, 
generate long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global 
Financing asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global 
Services assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global 
Financing asset base. The debt analysis above is further detailed 
in the Global Financing section on pages 76–77.
	
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt-
to-capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and 
equity as management believes this is more representative of the 
company’s core business operations. This ratio can vary from 
period to period as the company manages its global cash and 
debt positions.
	
“Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financ-
ing debt and equity) was 59.4 percent at December 31, 2014 
compared to 39.0 percent at December 31, 2013. The ratio was 
impacted by retirement-related declines in equity of $6,366 million 
primarily driven by plan remeasurements, the non-recurring charge 
associated with the disposal of the Microelectronics business of 
$3,381 million and declines from translation of $2,074 million due 
to the strengthening U.S. dollar. 
	
Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2014 
was 77.3 percent versus 63.4 percent at December 31, 2013 and 
was similarly impacted by the retirement plan remeasurements 
and strengthening of the U.S. dollar as noted above.
Equity
Total equity decreased by $10,916 million from December 31, 2013 
as a result of an increase in treasury stock of $13,474 million mainly 
due to gross common stock repurchases, an increase in other 
comprehensive losses of $6,274 million primarily due to retirement 
plan remeasurements, partially offset by an increase in retained 
earnings of $7,751 million. The retirement plan remeasurement 
impact to other comprehensive losses was driven by: changes 
in discount rates ($7.4 billion) and in mortality rate assumptions 
($1.7 billion), partially offset by improved asset returns ($3.1 billion).
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income 
statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earn-
ings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s 
calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may 
differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. 
Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on 
page 22 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earn-
ings information.


===== PAGE 47 =====
46
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2013:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$48,684
$ 394 
$   629
$49,706 
Gross profit margin
49.5%
0.4 pts.
0.6 pts.
50.5%
SG&A
$23,451
$(394)
$  (376 )
$22,680 
RD&E
5,743
—
(57)
5,686
Other (income) and expense
(333)
(16)
—
(349)
Total expense and other (income)
28,440
(410)
(433)
27,597
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
20,244
804
1,062
22,110
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
20.6%
0.8 pts.
1.1 pts.
22.5%
Provision for income taxes*
$  3,363
$   57 
$   333
$  3,753 
Effective tax rate
16.6%
(0.4) pts.
0.7 pts.
17.0%
Income from continuing operations
$16,881
$ 747 
$   729
$18,356 
Income margin from continuing operations
17.2%
0.8 pts.
0.7 pts.
18.7%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$    (398)
$   — 
$      —
$    (398 )
Net income
$16,483
$ 747 
$   729
$17,959 
Diluted earnings per share:
 
 
Continuing operations
$  15.30
$0.68
$  0.66
 $  16.64
Discontinued operations
$   (0.36)
$    — 
$      —
$   (0.36 )
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$24,113
$ 27,385 
(11.9)%*
Gross profit margin
53.3%
52.4%
1.0 pts.
Total expense and other (income)
$  5,767
$   7,235
(20.3)%
Total expense and other  
(income)-to-revenue ratio
23.9%
26.4%
(2.5) pts.
Income from continuing operations 
before income taxes
$  7,094
$  7,102
(0.1)%
Provision for income taxes from 
continuing operations
$  1,580
$     885
78.4%
Income from continuing operations
$  5,515
$  6,216
(11.3)%
Income from continuing  
operations margin
22.9%
22.7%
0.2 pts.
Loss from discontinued operations, 
net of tax
  (31)
(32)
(1.7)%
Net income
$  5,484
$   6,185
(11.3)%
Earnings per share from continuing 
operations:
Assuming dilution
$    5.54
$     5.76
(3.8)%
Consolidated earnings per share—
assuming dilution
$    5.51
$     5.73
(3.8)%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
995.4
1,080.0
(7.8)%
* (7.6) percent adjusted for currency; (2.3) percent adjusted for divestitures and currency.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2014 and 2013.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$5,484
$6,185 
(11.3)%
Loss from discontinued operations, 
net of tax
(31)
(32)
(1.7)
Income from continuing operations
5,515
6,216
(11.3)
Non-operating adjustments  
(net of tax):
Acquisition-related charges
186
268
(30.5)
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
84
164
(49.1)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$5,785
$ 6,649
(13.0)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)  
earnings per share
$  5.81
$  6.16 
(5.7)%
* See page 52 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earning.
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the company reported $24.1 billion 
in revenue and delivered diluted earnings per share from continu-
ing operations of $5.54 as reported and $5.81 on an operating 
(non-GAAP) basis. The results of continuing operations exclude a 
net loss from discontinued operations of $31 million related to the 
announced divestiture of the Microelectronics business. On a con-
solidated basis, net income in the fourth quarter was $5.5 billion, 


===== PAGE 48 =====
47
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
with diluted earnings per share of $5.51. The company generated 
$6.1 billion in cash from operations and $6.6 billion in free cash flow 
in the fourth quarter driving shareholder returns of $1.2 billion in 
gross common stock repurchases and dividends. 
	
The company’s results in the fourth quarter were impacted 
by the dramatic strengthening of the U.S. dollar which began in 
September and continued at a rapid pace. In addition, nearly all the 
currencies moved in an unfavorable direction for the company’s 
business profile and impacted revenue and earnings. Although the 
company hedges a portion of its cross-border cash flows which 
defers the impacts of currency movement, it does not eliminate it. 
The company’s hedges are designed to provide stability around 
the receipt of cash, but there is no year-to-year benefit in the 
income statement when a currency’s direction is sustained over 
a longer period.
	
In the fourth quarter, total consolidated revenue decreased 
11.9 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency 
(5 points) and the divestitures of the industry standard server and 
customer care businesses (5 points). These impacts represented 
approximately $2.8 billion in revenue and a 10-point impact to 
the year-to-year growth rate. In the fourth quarter, the company 
continued its strong performance in its strategic imperatives 
that address the market shifts in data, cloud and engagement. 
Together they delivered double-digit growth, as they did in every 
quarter during 2014.
	
Within the company’s segments, Global Services revenue 
declined 7.8 percent as reported, but was flat year to year adjusted 
for currency (6 points) and the divestitures (2 points). Global 
Technology Services revenue decreased 7.6 percent as reported, 
but increased 2 percent adjusted for currency (6 points) and the 
divested businesses (4 points) with growth across all business 
lines. Global Business Services revenue decreased 8.4 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency). Software revenue decreased 
6.9 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency). Systems and 
Technology revenue decreased 39.0 percent as reported and 
12 percent adjusted for the industry standard server divestiture 
(24 points) and currency (3 points), reflecting the end of the product 
cycle in System z and declines in Power Systems and Storage. 
	
From a geographic perspective, revenue in the major markets 
declined 10.8 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for cur-
rency (5 points) and the divestitures (4 points). The growth markets 
declined 15.7 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for the 
divestitures (9 points) and currency (5 points) compared to the 
fourth quarter of the prior year. Within the growth markets, the 
BRIC countries decreased 21.4 percent as reported and 8 percent 
adjusted for the divestitures (9 points) and currency (4 points).
	
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 1.0 points 
versus the fourth quarter of 2013 to 53.3 percent. The operating 
(non-GAAP) gross margin of 53.9 percent increased 0.6 points 
year to year driven primarily by improvements in GBS, and a mix 
away from the low margin industry standard server business.
	
Total expense and other (income) decreased 20.3 percent in 
the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to the prior year. Total oper-
ating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) also decreased 
20.3 percent year to year. The key drivers of the year-to-year 
change in total expense and other (income) were approximately:
	
	
Total 	
Operating 
	
	
Consolidated 	
 (non-GAAP)
•	 Currency*	
(5)	 points 	
(4)	 points
•	 Acquisitions**	
1	 points	
1	 points
•	 Base expense	
(17)	 points	
(17)	 points
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is 
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges. 
The reported level of expense in the fourth quarter reflected not 
only the ongoing run rate of the business, but also the impact of 
the industry standard server divestiture and a charge for workforce 
rebalancing. The entire year-to-year decline was driven by the com-
bination of the gain on the divestiture and the fact that the expense 
for the industry standard server business is no longer in the run 
rate. Adjusting for this divestiture, total operating (non-GAAP) 
expense and other (income) would have increased approximately 
2 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency and acquisitions) 
including the workforce rebalancing charge of approximately $580 
million, nearly all of which was a year-to-year increase.
	
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $7.1 billion 
decreased 0.1 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin was 
29.4 percent, an increase of 3.5 points versus the fourth quar-
ter of 2013. The continuing operations effective tax rate for the 
fourth quarter was 22.3 percent, up 9.8 points year to year. This 
increase was primarily due to a benefit included in the prior year 
rate associated with the settlement of a U.S. tax audit in the fourth 
quarter of 2013. Income from continuing operations of $5.5 billion 
decreased 11.3 percent year to year and the net income margin 
was 22.9 percent, an increase of 0.2 points. Net income of $5.5 
billion decreased $701 million year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) 
pre-tax income from continuing operations decreased 2.3 per-
cent year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin 
was 30.7 percent, an increase of 3.0 points year to year. Operat-
ing (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations decreased 
13.0 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) income margin of 
24.0 percent decreased 0.3 points compared to the prior year. The 
operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations 
was 21.8 percent versus 12.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2013 
driven by the same factor described above.
	
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $5.54 
decreased 3.8 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted 
earnings per share of $5.81 decreased 5.7 percent versus the 
fourth quarter of 2013. Diluted earnings per share from discontin-
ued operations was ($0.03) in the fourth quarter of both years. In 
the fourth quarter of 2014, the company repurchased 0.7 million 
shares of its common stock. 


===== PAGE 49 =====
48
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2014 versus the fourth quarter of 2013 reportable segment external revenue and gross 
margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arms-length transfer 
price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items. 
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$  9,167
$  9,917
(7.6)%
1.6%*
Gross margin
38.5%
38.8%
(0.3) pts.
Global Business Services
4,349
4,747
(8.4)%
(3.0)%
Gross margin
32.0%
30.7%
1.4 pts.
Software
7,578
8,140
(6.9)%
(3.4)%
Gross margin
90.0%
90.5%
(0.6) pts.
Systems and Technology
2,406
3,947
(39.0)%
(12.2)%*
Gross margin
49.6%
42.2%
7.3 pts.
Global Financing
532
534
(0.5)%
4.6%
Gross margin
48.7%
43.3%
5.3 pts.
Other
82
100
(17.7)%
(14.2)%
Gross margin
(401.7)%
(234.8)%
(166.9) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$24,113
$27,385
(11.9)%
(2.3)%*
Total consolidated gross profit
$12,862
$14,337
(10.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin
53.3%
52.4%
1.0 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
101
103
(2.0)%
Acquisition-related charges
—
1
(100.0)%
Retirement-related costs/(income)
33
154
(78.8)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$12,996
$14,596
(11.0)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
53.9%
53.3%
0.6  pts.
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Global Services
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the Global Services segments, GTS 
and GBS, delivered revenue of $13,516 million, a decrease of 
7.8 percent as reported, but flat year to year adjusted for currency 
(6 points) and the divested customer care and industry standard 
server businesses (2 points). Pre-tax income in the fourth quar-
ter decreased 25.0 percent and the pre-tax margin decreased 
3.5 points to 15.9 percent. Total outsourcing revenue of $6,042 
million decreased 9.3 percent as reported, but flat year to year 
adjusted for currency (6 points) and the divestitures (3 points). 
Total transactional revenue of $5,839 million decreased 5.9 per-
cent (flat adjusted for currency).
	
Global Technology Services revenue of $9,167 million 
decreased 7.6 percent as reported, but increased 2 percent 
adjusted for currency (6 points) and the divested businesses 
(4 points). Within GTS, outsourcing revenue of $5,109 million 
decreased 9.6 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent 
adjusted for currency (6 points) and the divestitures (5 points). 
Clients are continuing to sign large outsourcing engagements 
that leverage the company’s cloud, business analytics and mobile 
solutions. Clients are using these outsourcing engagements as 
a way to optimize their IT infrastructure while at the same time 
enabling new services to their customers. Lufthansa and ABN 
AMRO, both signings which were over $1 billion in contract 


===== PAGE 50 =====
49
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
value, are recent examples of this. ITS revenue of $2,423 million 
decreased 1.6 percent from the fourth quarter of the prior year as 
reported, but increased 4 percent adjusted for currency. The year-
to-year increase was driven largely by the company’s high-value 
security, mobility and resiliency offerings. SoftLayer continues to 
attract new workloads to the platform, and in October, the com-
pany announced that IBM was selected by SAP to be the global 
cloud provider for their enterprise cloud solution. IBM’s ability to 
integrate public and private workloads within its hybrid cloud was 
a critical differentiator for SAP. The company has continued to 
expand its datacenter footprint and in the fourth quarter opened 
cloud centers in Melbourne, Paris, Mexico City, Tokyo and Frank-
furt. Maintenance revenue of $1,635 million decreased 9.2 percent 
as reported, but was up 1 percent for the quarter, adjusted for 
currency (6 points) and the industry standard server divestiture 
(4 points). The GTS gross profit margin of 38.5 percent decreased 
0.3 points in the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to prior year. 
In the fourth quarter, pre-tax income decreased 26.4 percent 
to $1,464 million and the pre-tax margin declined 3.9 points to 
15.6 percent compared to the prior year. The year-to-year decrease 
was driven by several key factors. First, GTS lost profit on a year-to-
year basis as a result of the customer care and industry standard 
server divestitures. Second, the fourth quarter workforce rebalanc-
ing charge of $277 million impacted profit. Finally, the company 
continued to invest in both offerings and operational capabilities. 
This includes targeted investments in mobility, security and cloud 
which complement clients’ systems-of-record, as well as opera-
tional improvements such as the yield from the rebalancing action 
taken earlier in the year, and more broadly deployed automation in 
the delivery centers.
	
Global Business Services revenue of $4,349 million decreased 
8.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter 
of 2014. Consulting and Systems Integration revenue of $3,416 
million declined 8.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) 
in the fourth quarter. Revenue was down in the traditional back 
office implementations, particularly in North America. However, 
the company again had strong double-digit growth in its practices 
that address cloud, analytics, mobile and security. Through its 
partnership with Apple, the company released the first 10 Mobile-
First for iOS solutions in the fourth quarter. GBS Outsourcing 
revenue of $933 million decreased 7.5 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) in the fourth quarter, reflecting sequential improve-
ment at constant currency compared to the third quarter of 2014. 
However, performance continued to be impacted by a challenging 
pricing environment. 
	
The GBS gross profit margin of 32.0 percent expanded 
1.4 points in the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to prior year, 
which is a good indicator of the value its offerings deliver. Pre-tax 
income decreased 22.0 percent to $733 million including a 15 point 
impact from the workforce rebalancing charge, which will pay back 
in 2015. Pre-tax margin declined 2.7 points to 16.4 percent com-
pared to the prior year. Although the company continued to see a 
slowdown in back office implementations in the traditional parts 
of the portfolio, it is investing in strategic partnerships and those 
should yield benefits in 2015. 
Software
Software revenue of $7,578 million decreased 6.9 percent (3 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter compared to the 
prior year. Middleware decreased 5.6 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency), while operating systems were down 18.8 percent 
(16 percent adjusted for currency). As expected, there was not a 
change in trajectory in the fourth quarter and performance was 
similar to the previous quarter. Total growth reflected a headwind 
from operating systems, driven by the divestiture of the indus-
try standard server business and Power Systems results. It also 
reflected business model changes, which impacted transaction 
revenue growth as customers continue to use the flexibility that 
has been provided in the deployment of software purchased 
through enterprise licensing agreements. This flexibility enables 
clients to optimize their capacity on the company’s platform for 
the long term. There was solid growth in many of the solution 
areas, including security, mobile and cloud. Security software 
again grew at a double-digit rate, marking the ninth consecu-
tive quarter of double-digit growth. With cybersecurity threats as 
one of the key issues that all customers are facing, the company 
has brought its analytics, big data, research IP, mobile and cloud 
capabilities together to create security offerings to address this 
market opportunity. The company’s software mobile offerings 
more than doubled in the quarter, as it leveraged the integrated 
MobileFirst portfolio, and software-as-a-service offerings were 
up nearly 50 percent. 
	
Key branded middleware revenue, which accounted for 
72 percent of total Software revenue in the fourth quarter of 
2014, decreased 6.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) 
compared to the prior year. Within key branded middleware, Web-
Sphere revenue decreased 6.4 percent (4 percent adjusted for 
currency). Information Management revenue decreased 9.1 per-
cent (6 percent adjusted for currency). Tivoli revenue decreased 
2.4 percent, but was up 1 percent adjusted for currency driven 
by security software. Workforce Solutions revenue decreased 
12.1 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). Rational revenue 
increased 4.1 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency) in the 
fourth quarter with improved year-to-year performance compared 
to the earlier quarters of 2014.
	
The Software gross profit margin remained strong at 90.0 per-
cent in the fourth quarter compared to 90.5 percent in fourth 
quarter of the prior year. Software pre-tax income of $3,765 mil-
lion in the fourth quarter decreased 11.2 percent year to year, 
with a pre-tax margin of 44.7 percent, a decline of 2.3 points. The 
fourth quarter of 2014 included a workforce rebalancing charge 
of $120 million that represented approximately 3 points of the 
year-to-year decline.


===== PAGE 51 =====
50
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology
Systems and Technology revenue of $2,406 million decreased 
39.0 percent as reported and 12 percent adjusted for the dives-
titure of the industry standard server business (24 points) and 
currency (3 points) in the fourth quarter of 2014, versus the same 
period in 2013. 
	
System z revenue decreased 25.8 percent (23 percent adjusted 
for currency), compared to the prior year period. This performance 
reflected the fact that the product was in the tenth and final quar-
ter of this product cycle. The last 10-quarter cycle was the z10. 
Comparing the current cycle to that of the z10, program-to-date 
System z revenue and gross profit is right on top of that cycle. The 
company continues to innovate on the platform, and in January 
2015 announced the z13, the new generation of the IBM mainframe. 
	
Power Systems revenue decreased 13.4 percent (11 percent 
adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year period which 
represented a modest sequential improvement at constant cur-
rency. Power has been repositioned and is not only a systems 
business, but also an open chip processor and an IP income 
opportunity through the OpenPOWER foundation. There was 
double-digit growth in the low end, driven by entry-level POWER8-
based systems, and in the fourth quarter, the company introduced 
its high-end POWER8 enterprise systems. In addition, the com-
pany saw continued expansion of the OpenPOWER consortium, 
now with over 80 members.
	
Storage revenue decreased 8.3 percent (5 percent adjusted 
for currency) in the fourth quarter compared to the prior year 
period representing a modest sequential improvement compared 
to the rate in the prior quarter. There was strong growth again in the 
FlashSystems and Storwize portfolio. This growth was offset by 
the wind down of the legacy OEM business and continued weak-
ness in high-end disk. 
	
Systems and Technology’s gross profit margin of 49.6 percent 
increased 7.3 points in the fourth quarter of 2014 versus the prior 
year. The increase was primarily due to mix (7.6 points) driven 
by the divestiture of the industry standard server business. This 
improvement was offset by a decrease due to margin. Lower mar-
gins in Power Systems (0.8 points) and Storage (0.6 points) were 
partially offset by higher margins in System z (0.6 points). 
	
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income of $388 million 
increased 12.2 percent with a pre-tax margin of 15.5 percent, up 
7 points year to year. This performance included a workforce rebal-
ancing charge of $32 million in the fourth quarter of 2014 which 
impacted year-to-year growth by approximately 9 points and pre-
tax margin in the fourth quarter by approximately 1 point.
Global Financing
Global Financing revenue of $532 million was down 0.5 percent 
due to a decrease in used equipment sales revenue, partially offset 
by an increase in financing revenue. The Global Financing fourth-
quarter pre-tax income decreased 10.8 percent to $526 million 
and the pre-tax margin decreased 2.7 points to 47.0 percent. The 
decrease in pre-tax income was driven by a decrease in gross 
profit ($46 million) as well as an increase in financing receivable 
provisions ($26 million), partially offset by a reduction in SG&A 
expenses ($11 million).
Geographic Revenue
Total geographic revenue of $23,990 million decreased 12.0 per-
cent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (5 points) 
and currency (5 points) in the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to 
the prior year. Major market countries decreased 10.8 percent as 
reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) and cur-
rency (5 points). Growth market countries decreased 15.7 percent 
as reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (9 points) and 
currency (5 points). 
	
In the growth markets, the year-to-year performance adjusted 
for currency and the divestitures improved by approximately 
2 points from the third quarter. This improvement was driven by 
performance in China which decreased 19.9 percent as reported, 
but only 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (18 points) and cur-
rency (1 point). On an adjusted basis, this represented a significant 
sequential improvement compared to the prior quarter. China’s 
fourth quarter performance was driven by strength in software 
and several large mainframe transactions, with four of the compa-
ny’s five largest banking clients in China adding substantial new 
mainframe capacity. Within the BRIC countries, combined revenue 
decreased 21.4 percent as reported and 8 percent adjusted for 
divestitures (9 points) and currency (4 points) in the fourth quar-
ter. On an adjusted basis, this performance was consistent with 
the third quarter, with the improvement in China offset by weaker 
performance in Brazil. 
	
Americas revenue of $11,090 million decreased 9.0 percent 
as reported and 4 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) 
and currency (2 points) compared to the fourth quarter of 2013. 
North America declined 8.1 percent as reported and 4 percent 
adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency (1 point). The 
Latin American growth markets declined 14.7 percent as reported 
and 4 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) and currency 
(7 points). The decrease in North America was driven by declines 
in Global Business Services, though signings grew for the second 
consecutive quarter. Declines in the Latin American growth mar-
kets were driven by the weak performance in Brazil. 


===== PAGE 52 =====
51
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
EMEA revenue of $8,001 million decreased 12.8 percent as 
reported, but only 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (5 points) 
and currency (7 points) year to year in the fourth quarter of 2014. 
Major market countries were down 13.2 percent as reported 
and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) and currency 
(7 points). Growth market countries were down 9.7 percent, 
but were up 7 percent adjusted for divestitures (10 points) and 
currency (6 points). On an adjusted basis, Europe’s overall perfor-
mance improved from the third quarter. In the major markets, there 
were improvements in the UK and Italy, and continued growth in 
Spain. Compared to the prior year, the UK decreased 10.0 percent 
as reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (7 points) and 
currency (2 points) compared with a decline of 5 percent on an 
adjusted basis in the prior quarter. Italy decreased 7.5 percent as 
reported, but grew 5 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) 
and currency (9 points) compared with a decline of 2 percent on 
an adjusted basis in the prior quarter. Spain decreased 7.8 per-
cent as reported, but grew 3 percent adjusted for divestitures 
(2 points) and currency (9 points). The increase in the growth mar-
kets when adjusted for currency and the divestitures was driven 
by strength in the central and eastern European countries.
	
Asia Pacific fourth quarter revenue decreased 16.7 percent as 
reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (8 points) and 
currency (7 points) year over year. Japan decreased 14.5 percent 
as reported, but grew 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) 
and currency (12 points). Asia Pacific growth market countries 
decreased 18.1 percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted 
for divestitures (11 points) and currency (3 points) year to year. 
Although there was improved performance this quarter in China 
on an adjusted basis, there were continued year-to-year declines 
in some of the other larger growth market countries. 
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2014
2013
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$5,767
$7,235
(20.3)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(93)
(93)
(0.1)
Acquisition-related charges
(2)
(16)
(87.5)
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(74)
(104)
(28.5)
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$5,598
$7,023
(20.3)%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
23.9%
26.4%
(2.5) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
23.2%
25.6%
(2.4) pts.
Total expense and other (income) decreased 20.3 percent in the 
fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 23.9 percent 
compared to 26.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2013. Total oper-
ating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) also decreased 
20.3 percent in the fourth quarter. The decrease in total oper-
ating expense and other (income) was primarily driven by lower 
base expense (17 points) and currency (4 points), partially offset 
by increased expense from acquisitions over the past 12 months 
(1 point). The decline in base expense was driven by the gain 
from the industry standard server divestiture, partially offset by 
the workforce reduction charge recorded in the fourth quarter. 
Other (income)/expense included the pre-tax gain from the indus-
try standard server divestiture of $1.4 billion; while selling, general 
and administrative expense included the workforce rebalancing 
change of approximately $580 million. Additionally, expense asso-
ciated with the industry standard server business is no longer in 
the run rate which also contributed to the year-to-year decline in 
the fourth quarter.
Results of Discontinued Operations
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $31 million in 
the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to $32 million in 2013.
Cash Flow
The company generated $6,059 million in cash flow provided by 
operating activities, a decrease of $468 million compared to the 
fourth quarter of 2013, driven primarily by declines in operational 
performance within net income and an increase in cash taxes paid 
($203 million). Net cash used in investing activities of $1,236 mil-
lion decreased $1,666 million compared to the prior year, primarily 
due to cash proceeds received from the divestiture of the industry 
standard server business. Net cash used in financing activities 
of $5,699 million increased $2,686 million compared to the prior 
year primarily due to debt retirements during the quarter, offset 
by decreased cash used for gross common stock repurchases 
($5,665 million).


===== PAGE 53 =====
52
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from 
similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 22 for the 
company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter 2014:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$12,862
$ 101
$   33
$12,996
Gross profit margin
53.3%
0.4 pts.
0.1 pts.
53.9%
SG&A
$  6,034
$  (94)
$  (95)
$  5,845
RD&E
1,320
—
21
1,341
Other (income) and expense
(1,506)
(1)
—
(1,506)
Total expense and other (income)
5,767
(95)
(74)
5,598
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
7,094
196
107
7,398
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
29.4%
0.8 pts.
0.4 pts.
30.7%
Provision for income taxes*
$  1,580
$   10
$   24
$  1,613
Effective tax rate
22.3%
(0.5) pts.
0.0 pts.
21.8%
Income from continuing operations
$  5,515
$ 186
$   84
$  5,785
Income margin from continuing operations
22.9%
0.8 pts.
0.3 pts.
24.0%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$      (31)
$   —
$    —
$      (31)
Net income
$  5,484
$ 186
$   84
$  5,753
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations
$    5.54
$0.19
$0.08
$    5.81
Discontinued operations
$   (0.03)
$    —
$   —
$   (0.03)
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income 
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter 2013:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$14,337
$ 105
$ 154
$14,596
Gross profit margin
52.4%
0.4 pts.
0.6 pts.
53.3%
SG&A
$  5,987
$(101)
$  (90)
$  5,796
RD&E
1,452
—
(14)
1,438
Other (income) and expense
(116)
(8)
—
(124)
Total expense and other (income)
7,235
(109)
(104)
7,023
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
7,102
213
258
7,574
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
25.9%
0.8 pts.
0.9 pts.
27.7%
Provision for income taxes*
$     885
$  (55)
$   94
$     925
Effective tax rate
12.5%
(1.1) pts. 
0.8 pts.
12.2%
Income from continuing operations
$  6,216
$ 268
$ 164
$  6,649
Income margin from continuing operations
22.7%
1.0 pts.
0.6 pts.
24.3%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$      (32)
$    —
$    —
$      (32)
Net income
$  6,185
$ 268
$ 164
$  6,617
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations
$    5.76
$0.25
$0.15
$    6.16
Discontinued operations
$   (0.03)
$    —
$    —
$   (0.03)
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income 
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 54 =====
53
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the 
company’s financial performance in 2013 as compared to 2012. 
As discussed in the “Organization of Information” section on page 
22, 2013 and 2012 financial performance has been reclassified to 
reflect discontinued operations presentation.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$  98,367
$102,874 
(4.4)%*
Gross profit margin
49.5%
49.0%
0.5 pts.
Total expense and other (income)
$  28,440
$  27,821
2.2%
Total expense and other  
(income)-to-revenue ratio
28.9%
27.0%
1.9 pts.
Income before income taxes from 
continuing operations
$  20,244
$  22,540
(10.2)%
Provision for income taxes from 
continuing operations
3,363
5,541
(39.3)%
Income from continuing  
operations
$  16,881
$  16,999
(0.7)%
Income from continuing  
operations margin
17.2%
16.5%
0.6 pts.
Loss from discontinued  
operations, net of tax
$      (398)
$      (395)
0.6%
Net income
$  16,483
$  16,604
(0.7)%
Earnings per share from  
continuing operations:
Assuming dilution
$    15.30
$    14.71
4.0%
Consolidated earnings per share—
assuming dilution
$    14.94
$    14.37
4.0%
Weighted-average shares 
outstanding:
Assuming dilution
1,103.0
1,155.4
(4.5)%
Assets**
$126,223
$119,213
5.9%
Liabilities**
$103,294
$100,229
3.1%
Equity**
$  22,929
$  18,984
20.8%
  * (2.3) percent adjusted for currency. 
** At December 31.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for 2013 and 2012. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$16,483
$16,604
(0.7)%
Loss from discontinued operations,  
net of tax
(398)
(395)
0.6
Income from continuing operations
$16,881
$16,999
(0.7)%
Non-operating adjustments  
(net of tax):
Acquisition-related charges
747
641
16.5
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
729
381
91.2
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$18,356
$18,022
1.9%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
earnings per share
$  16.64
$  15.60
6.7%
* See page 63 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-
GAAP earnings.
Snapshot
In 2013, the company reported revenue of $98.4 billion, expanded 
gross and net income margins, and delivered diluted earnings 
per share from continuing operations growth of 4.0 percent as 
reported and 6.7 percent on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The 
results of continuing operations exclude net losses from discon-
tinued operations of $0.4 billion in 2013 and 2012, respectively. 
On a consolidated basis, net income in 2013 was $16.5 billion, 
a decrease of 0.7 percent year to year, with diluted earnings per 
share of $14.94. The company generated $17.5 billion in cash from 
operations and $15.0 billion in free cash flow driving shareholder 
returns of $17.9 billion in gross common stock repurchases and 
dividends. In 2013, the company continued the transformation of its 
portfolio to higher value expending $3.1 billion to acquire 10 compa-
nies to expand its capabilities in its key growth areas, in addition to 
maintaining high levels of investment of $5.7 billion in total research 
and development and $3.8 billion in net capital expenditures. 
	
The company also continued to shift its investments to address 
the key trends in information technology—social, mobile, big data/
analytics and cloud. Several years ago, the company identified 
and established objectives for four key growth initiatives—Smarter 
Planet, business analytics, cloud and growth markets—to address 
these trends. In 2013, across the business, Smarter Planet, busi-
ness analytics and cloud had strong performance. Smarter 
Planet revenue grew about 20 percent compared to 2012, with 


===== PAGE 55 =====
54
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
strength across all areas, including Smarter Commerce, Smarter 
Cities, Social Business and industry solutions. Business analyt-
ics revenue of $15.7 billion increased 9 percent year to year, led 
by Global Business Services and Software. In 2013, the com-
pany delivered $4.4 billion of cloud-based solutions revenue, an 
increase of 69 percent compared to 2012. In addition, within that 
content, $1.7 billion was delivered as a service. Across the com-
pany’s performance, there was overlap between these initiatives. 
In total, software made up about half of that combined content. 
The software content improved the company’s business mix and 
contributed to margin expansion. 
	
Segment revenue was led by Software which increased 
1.9 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key 
branded middleware which increased 4.8 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency). The key growth initiatives fueled this per-
formance. Global Business Services returned to revenue growth 
at constant currency (down 0.9 percent as reported; up 3 per-
cent adjusted for currency) driven by the company’s investments 
in the Digital Front Office. While revenue in Global Technology 
Services declined 4.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency), 
revenue trajectory improved in the second half. Global Financing 
revenue improved 0.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) 
versus 2012. The Software, Global Services and Global Financing 
businesses all grew pre-tax income and expanded their pre-
tax margin in 2013 compared to 2012. Systems and Technology 
impacted the company’s overall performance in 2013. Revenue 
decreased 19.0 percent (18 percent adjusted for currency) year 
to year driven by the back end of the mainframe product cycle 
and business model challenges specific to Power Systems, Stor-
age and System x. Pre-tax income in Systems and Technology 
decreased $1.7 billion compared to 2012. 
	
Revenue from the company’s growth markets underperformed 
in 2013, particularly in the second half of the year. For the full year, 
growth markets revenue decreased 4.9 percent as reported and 
2 percent at constant currency. 
	
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 0.5 points 
versus 2012 to 49.5 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) gross 
margin of 50.5 percent increased 0.9 points compared to the prior 
year. The increase in gross margin in 2013 was driven by margin 
improvements in the Global Services segments and an improved 
mix driven by Software, partially offset by margin decreases in 
Systems and Technology. 
	
Total expense and other (income) increased 2.2 percent in 
2013 versus 2012. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other 
(income) increased 1.5 percent year to year. The year-to-year driv-
ers were approximately:
	
	
Total 	
Operating 
	
	
Consolidated 	
 (non-GAAP)
•	 Currency* 	
(1)	 point	
(1)	 point
•	 Acquisitions**	
2	 points	
2	 points
•	 Base expense	
1	 point	
1	 point
  * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
There were several items that had an impact on total expense and 
other (income) year to year. Workforce rebalancing charges for 
2013 were $1.0 billion compared to $0.8 billion in 2012. Bad debt 
expense increased $0.1 billion year to year driven by higher spe-
cific account reserves. In addition, in 2012, the company recorded 
a gain of approximately $0.4 billion related to the divestiture of 
the Retail Store Solutions (RSS) business, and also recorded a 
charge of approximately $0.2 billion related to a court ruling in 
the UK regarding one of IBM’s UK defined benefit pension plans. 
This charge was not included in operating (non-GAAP) expense 
and other (income). In addition, as a result of certain parts of the 
business not performing as expected, performance-related com-
pensation in 2013 across both cost and expense was down about 
$0.8 billion year to year. 
	
Pre-tax income from continuing operations decreased 
10.2 percent and the pre-tax margin was 20.6 percent, a decrease 
of 1.3 points versus 2012. The continuing operations effective tax 
rate was 16.6 percent in 2013, a decrease of 8.0 points year to 
year. Income from continuing operations decreased 0.7 percent 
year to year and the loss from discontinued operations, net of 
tax was $0.4 billion in 2013 flat compared to 2012. Net income 
decreased 0.7 percent versus 2012. The as reported effective tax 
rate for 2013 was 15.6 percent, a decrease of 8.6 points year to 
year driven by an improvement in the ongoing tax rate and discrete 
tax items, including audit settlements. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-
tax income decreased 7.2 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) 
pretax margin was 22.5 percent, a decrease of 0.7 points versus 
2012. Operating (non-GAAP) net income increased 1.9 percent 
and the operating (non-GAAP) net income margin of 18.7 percent 
increased 1.2 points versus the prior year. The operating (non-
GAAP) effective tax rate was 17.0 percent versus 24.3 percent in 
2012 driven by the same factors described above. 
	
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations 
improved 4.0 percent year to year reflecting the benefits of the 
common stock repurchase program. In 2013, the company repur-
chased approximately 73 million shares of its common stock. 
Diluted earnings per share from discontinued operations was 
($0.36) in 2013 compared to ($0.34) in 2012. Total diluted earn-
ings per share of $14.94 increased $0.57 from 2012. Operating 
(non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $16.64 increased $1.04 
versus 2012 driven primarily by margin expansion and common 
stock repurchases, partially offset by decreased revenue. 
	
At December 31, 2013, the company’s balance sheet and 
liquidity positions were strong and well positioned to support the 
business over the long term. Cash and marketable securities at 
year end was $11.1 billion, consistent with the year-end 2012 bal-
ance. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows are 
highlighted below.
	
Total assets increased $7.0 billion ($9.3 billion adjusted for cur-
rency) from December 31, 2012 driven by: 
•	 Increases in prepaid pension assets ($4.6 billion), goodwill ($1.9 
billion), and total receivables ($1.2 billion), partially offset by
•	 Decreases in deferred taxes ($0.7 billion).


===== PAGE 56 =====
55
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total liabilities increased $3.1 billion ($4.5 billion adjusted for cur-
rency) from December 31, 2012 driven by:
•	 Increased total debt ($6.4 billion) and increases in deferred 
tax liabilities ($1.3 billion); partially offset by
•	 Decreased retirement and nonpension postretirement ben-
efit obligations ($4.2 billion) and decreases in compensation 
and benefits ($0.9 billion).
Total equity of $22.9 billion increased $3.9 billion from Decem-
ber 31, 2012 as a result of:
•	 Higher retained earnings ($12.4 billion), decreased losses in 
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) of $4.2 billion 
and increased common stock ($1.5 billion), partially offset by
•	 Increased treasury stock ($14.1 billion) driven by share 
repurchases.
The company generated $17.5 billion in cash flow provided by 
operating activities, a decrease of $2.1 billion when compared 
to 2012, primarily driven by operational performance and a net 
increase in the use of cash for taxes of $2.2 billion primarily driven 
by an increase in cash tax payments. Net cash used in investing 
activities of $7.3 billion was $1.7 billion lower than 2012, primarily 
due to a decrease in cash used associated with the net purchases 
and sales of marketable securities and other investments ($1.2 
billion) and decreased net capital investments ($0.5 billion). Net 
cash used in financing activities of $9.9 billion was $2.1 billion lower 
compared to 2012, primarily due to increased proceeds from net 
debt ($4.7 billion), partially offset by increased cash used for gross 
common stock repurchases ($1.9 billion). 
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2013 versus 2012 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s 
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect 
an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$38,551 
$  40,236 
(4.2)%
(1.4)%
Gross margin
38.1%
36.6%
1.5 pts.
Global Business Services
18,396
18,566
(0.9)%
2.6%
Gross margin
30.9%
30.0%
0.9 pts.
Software
25,932
25,448
1.9%
2.9%
Gross margin
88.8%
88.7%
0.1 pts.
Systems and Technology
12,988
16,034
(19.0)%
(18.2)%
Gross margin
40.8%
43.4%
(2.6) pts.
Global Financing
2,022
2,013
0.4%
2.8%
Gross margin
45.6%
46.5%
(0.9 ) pts.
Other
478
577
(17.1)%
(16.4)%
Gross margin
(195.6)%
(71.6)%
(124.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$98,367 
$102,874 
(4.4)%
(2.3)%
Total consolidated gross profit
$48,684
$  50,361
(3.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin
49.5%
49.0%
0.5 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
388
375
3.5%
Acquisition-related charges
5
1
NM
Retirement-related costs/(income)
629
264
138.1%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$49,706 
$  51,001
(2.5)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
50.5%
49.6%
1.0 pts.
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 57 =====
56
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Global Services external revenue
$56,947 
$58,802 
(3.2)%
(0.2)%
Global Technology Services
$38,551 
$40,236 
(4.2)%
(1.4)%
Outsourcing
22,060
23,344
(5.5)
(2.7)
Integrated Technology Services
9,380
9,550
(1.8)
1.0
Maintenance
7,111
7,343
(3.1)
(0.7)
Global Business Services
$18,396
$18,566
(0.9)%
2.6%
Outsourcing
4,097
4,209
(2.6)
1.5
Consulting and Systems Integration
14,298 
14,358 
(0.4)
2.9
Global Technology Services revenue of $38,551 million in 2013 
decreased 4.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) year to 
year. From a geographic perspective, revenue declined in North 
America and Europe, partially offset by growth in Japan, adjusted 
for currency. GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 5.5 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Revenue performance 
was impacted by a decline in revenue from sales into existing 
base accounts and by the work done to improve the profitability 
of restructured low margin contracts. GTS Outsourcing had dou-
ble-digit signings growth in 2013 and started to realize the benefit 
from several of the large transformational contract signings in its 
fourth-quarter 2013 revenue. ITS revenue decreased 1.8 percent 
as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency in 2013 
compared to 2012. The company continued to shift the ITS busi-
ness toward higher value managed services such as business 
continuity, security and cloud. Within the cloud offerings, SoftLayer 
contributed 2 points of revenue growth to the ITS performance in 
2013, and a half-point to total GTS revenue for the year. In January 
2014, the company announced plans to invest over $1.2 billion to 
double its SoftLayer centers, and with 40 cloud datacenters in 
15 countries, the company will have cloud centers in every major 
geography and key financial center. 
	
Global Business Services revenue of $18,396 million decreased 
0.9 percent as reported, but increased 3 percent at constant cur-
rency in 2013 with growth in both GBS Outsourcing and C&SI, 
adjusted for currency. GBS revenue increased 0.5 percent (4 per-
cent at constant currency) in the second half of the year. On a 
geographic basis, revenue growth at constant currency was led 
by North America, Japan and the growth markets, while Europe 
was flat year to year. GBS delivered double-digit growth in each 
of the strategic growth initiatives of business analytics, Smarter 
Planet and cloud. The company has been investing to build 
capabilities in these key areas and at year-end 2013 had nearly 
20,000 resources in GBS focused on the growing Digital Front 
Office opportunity. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased 
2.6 percent as reported, but increased 2 percent adjusted for 
currency. C&SI revenue decreased 0.4 percent as reported, but 
increased 3 percent adjusted for currency. Both lines of business 
had constant currency revenue growth year to year in the growth 
markets. In 2013, the GBS backlog grew for the fifth consecutive 
year at constant currency led by the major markets. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Global Services
Global Technology Services
External gross profit
$14,691 
$14,740 
(0.3)%
External gross profit margin
38.1%
36.6%
1.5 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  6,983
$  6,961
0.3%
Pre-tax margin
17.6%
16.8%
0.8 pts.
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$  5,676
$  5,564
2.0%
External gross profit margin
30.9%
30.0%
0.9 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  3,214
$  2,983
7.7%
Pre-tax margin
16.8%
15.5%
1.3 pts.
areas. Total outsourcing revenue of $26,157 million decreased 
5.1 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and total transactional 
revenue of $23,678 million decreased 1.0 percent as reported, but 
increased 2 percent adjusted for currency year to year. The esti-
mated Global Services backlog was $143 billion at December 31, 
2013, an increase of 1.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) 
versus the December 31, 2012 balance.
Global Services
In 2013, the Global Services segments delivered $56,947 million 
of revenue, grew pre-tax income 2.5 percent and expanded pre-
tax margin 1.0 points. GBS returned to revenue growth in 2013, at 
constant currency, leveraging the investments made in the Digital 
Front Office practices. GTS revenue performance improved during 
the second half of 2013. Global Services had good performance in 
the key growth initiatives of Smarter Planet, business analytics and 
cloud, and continued to invest to expand its capabilities in these 


===== PAGE 58 =====
57
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Software external revenue
$25,932 
$25,448 
1.9%
2.9%
Middleware
$21,557 
$20,983 
2.7%
3.7%
Key Branded Middleware
17,322
16,528
4.8
5.7
WebSphere Family
8.2
9.1
Information Management
2.8
3.7
Workforce Solutions
10.8
11.9
Tivoli
3.9
4.8
Rational
4.9
6.0
Other middleware
4,235
4,455
(4.9)
(3.9)
Operating systems
2,447
2,525
(3.1)
(1.9)
Other
1,929
1,940
(0.6)
0.2
Software revenue of $25,932 million increased 1.9 percent as 
reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency in 2013 compared 
to 2012. The Software business delivered revenue growth, at 
constant currency, in all four quarters of the year. Revenue con-
tinued to mix toward key branded middleware with growth in all 
five brands. The Software value proposition remained strong for 
enterprise clients. Customers continued to increase deployment 
of the company’s middleware products and the business invested 
and gained share in social, mobile, analytics, cloud and security. 
Across the Software brands, there was strong performance in the 
growth initiatives that address the key market trends—Smarter 
Planet, business analytics and cloud. 
	
In January 2014, the company announced a $1 billion invest-
ment in Watson, and it established a new Watson Group within the 
Software business. This new unit is dedicated to the development 
and commercialization of cloud-delivered cognitive innovations. 
	
Key branded middleware revenue increased 4.8 percent (6 per-
cent adjusted for currency), with strong performance in the areas 
of analytics, cloud, mobile, social and security. The faster-growing 
and higher-value branded middleware accounted for 67 percent of 
total Software revenue in 2013, an increase of 2 points from 2012. 
	
WebSphere revenue increased 8.2 percent (9 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2013 and gained share. Revenue performance 
was driven by double-digit growth in the Commerce offerings, 
and growth in Business Integration and the on-premises Applica-
tion Server business. Mobile contributed strong revenue growth 
in 2013. MobileFirst, the company’s comprehensive portfolio 
of mobile software and services, was introduced in 2013 and 
extends value to clients to reach new markets and gain competi-
tive advantage. 
	
Information Management revenue increased 2.8 percent 
(4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013 compared to 2012. Perfor-
mance in 2013 included strong growth in the distributed database 
offerings, including Netezza, and content management software. 
GTS gross profit decreased 0.3 percent in 2013 and the gross profit 
margin improved 1.5 points year to year with margin expansion in 
each line of business, as well as in the growth markets and major 
markets. Pre-tax income increased 0.3 percent year to year and 
the pre-tax margin expanded 0.8 points to 17.6 percent. The 2013 
margin improvement was driven by reductions in performance-
related compensation, benefits from the second-quarter 2013 
workforce rebalancing activity and efficiency improvements primar-
ily through the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives, partially 
offset by higher year-to-year workforce rebalancing charges. 
	
The GBS gross profit margin expanded 0.9 points in 2013 with 
improved profit performance in Application Outsourcing. GBS 
pre-tax income increased 7.7 percent in 2013 with a pre-tax margin 
of 16.8 percent, an improvement of 1.3 points year to year. GBS 
benefited from reductions in performance-related compensation, 
the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives and the second-
quarter 2013 workforce rebalancing activity, partially offset by 
higher year-to-year workforce rebalancing charges. The savings 
from those actions fuel the investments being made in the key 
growth initiatives. 
	
The total Global Services business delivered profit growth and 
margin expansion throughout 2013. Pre-tax income of $10,197 mil-
lion in 2013 increased 2.5 percent year to year and the pre-tax 
margin expanded 1.0 points to 17.4 percent.


===== PAGE 59 =====
58
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Tivoli revenue increased 3.9 percent (5 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2013 and gained share, driven by storage growth and 
the security solutions portfolio. Tivoli storage revenue was up 
7 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Tivoli security 
revenue increased 17 percent (19 percent adjusted for currency) 
and reflected contribution from the acquisition of Trusteer in 
the third quarter of 2013, which extended Tivoli’s data security 
capabilities further into cloud and mobile environments. The 
transformation driven by mobile and cloud computing is raising 
the importance of security for enterprise customers. The com-
pany has been building and expanding its security capabilities 
and at year-end 2013 had 6,000 security experts worldwide, 3,000 
patents in security and 25 security laboratories worldwide across 
software and services. 
	
Workforce Solutions revenue increased 10.8 percent (12 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Performance was driven by 
Kenexa, which provides cloud-based recruiting and talent man-
agement solutions. 
	
Operating systems revenue decreased 3.1 percent (2 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013 compared to 2012, driven by 
declines in Systems z and Power Systems.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Software
External gross profit
$23,032
$22,569
2.0%
External gross profit margin
88.8%
88.7%
0.1 pts.
Pre-tax income
$11,106
$10,810
2.7%
Pre-tax margin
38.1%
37.6%
0.5 pts.
Software gross profit increased 2.0 percent in 2013, with a gross 
profit margin of 88.8 percent. Software pre-tax income increased 
2.7 percent to $11.1 billion and the pre-tax margin improved 
0.5 points to 38.1 percent. The Software business had another 
successful year leveraging revenue growth and expense savings, 
primarily from the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives, to 
drive profit growth and margin expansion. The relative strength 
of the Software business, fueled by growth in the key growth ini-
tiatives, improved the company’s business mix and contributed 
to its operating (non-GAAP) consolidated gross and net margin 
improvements in 2013.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue
$12,988 
$16,034 
(19.0)%
(18.2)%
System z
(13.4)%
(12.6)%
Power Systems
(31.4)
(30.7)
System x
(13.5)
(12.7)
Storage
(10.8)
(9.7)
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions 
(17.2)
(16.4)
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012)
(98.2)
(98.2)
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 19.0 percent (18 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. Adjusting for the 
divested RSS business, revenue declined 17.2 percent (16 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2013. Two issues within the business sig-
nificantly impacted the segment’s revenue and profit performance 
in 2013. First, STG was dealing with challenges in its hardware 
business models specific to Power Systems, Storage and x86. In 
addition, System z revenue was impacted by the product cycle, 
particularly in the second half, as the company entered the back 
end of the current mainframe cycle with difficult period-to-period 
comparisons driving revenue declines. 
	
System z revenue decreased 13.4 percent (13 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The decrease was primarily 
driven by lower revenue in North America, while revenue increased 
in the growth markets. Millions of instructions per second (MIPS)
shipments increased 6 percent in 2013 versus 2012. The increase 
in MIPS was driven by specialty engines, which increased 17 per-
cent year over year and continued to be more than 50 percent of 
the total volumes. The decline in System z revenue was expected 
based on the product’s movement through the product cycle in 
2013. In the current mainframe cycle, the company has shipped 
28 percent more MIPS compared to the same period in the prior 
cycle. The revenue and gross profit in the current cycle are each 
about 99 percent of the previous cycle, net of currency. The addi-
tional MIPS capacity in the current product cycle is a reflection of 
the ongoing relevance of the mainframe to clients, and provides 
the company with financial returns consistent with past cycles.
	
Power Systems revenue decreased 31.4 percent (31 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The Power platform 
continued to ship significant capacity into the UNIX market, how-
ever this was more than offset by significant price performance, 
resulting in lower revenue. The company has been very successful 


===== PAGE 60 =====
59
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in the UNIX market, and took two actions to improve its business 
model in Power Systems. First, it is making the platform more rel-
evant to clients. To achieve this:
•	 In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company introduced a new 
Integrated Facility for Linux offering which enables clients to 
run Linux workloads in their existing servers. This mirrors the 
successful strategy the company executed on the System z 
platform; 
•	 The company will expand its Linux relevance even further 
with POWER8 in 2014, which will provide additional big data 
and cloud capabilities; and
•	 Through the company’s OpenPOWER consortium it is making 
Power technology available to an open development alliance, 
building an ecosystem around the Power technologies. 
Secondly, even with these additional capabilities, the company 
recognizes that the size of the Power platform will not return to 
prior revenue levels. The company will take action by right-sizing 
the business for the demand characteristics it expects. 
	
System x revenue decreased 13.5 percent (13 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. High-end System x revenue 
decreased 16 percent (16 percent adjusted for currency) and 
blades revenue declined 45 percent (45 percent adjusted for cur-
rency) in 2013 compared to 2012. The declines in both high-end 
System x and blade were partially offset by increased revenue 
driven by Pure Systems. 
	
Storage revenue decreased 10.8 percent (10 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The company’s flash solu-
tions continued to gain momentum in 2013 with positive revenue 
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis. 
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total revenue
$98,367 
$102,874 
(4.4)%
(2.3)%
Geographies
$97,800 
$102,268 
(4.4)%
(2.2)%
Americas
43,249
44,556
(2.9)
(2.0)
Europe/Middle East/Africa
31,628
31,775
(0.5)
(2.1)
Asia Pacific
22,923
25,937
(11.6)
(2.8)
Major markets
(4.2)%
(2.2)%
Growth markets
(4.9)%
(2.4)%
BRIC countries
(8.2)%
(5.6)%
growth. The Storwize products delivered double-digit growth, 
which were more than offset by declines in legacy OEM mid-range 
offerings, and declines in high-end offerings driven by significant 
pricing pressure. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Systems and Technology
External gross profit
$5,299 
$6,966 
(23.9)%
External gross profit margin
40.8%
43.4%
(2.6) pts.
Pre-tax income
$   213 
$1,866 
(88.6)%
Pre-tax margin
1.6%
11.2%
(9.6) pts.
The decrease in external gross profit in 2013 versus 2012 was due 
to lower revenue and a lower overall gross profit margin reflecting 
the business model challenges. Overall gross margin decreased 
2.6 points year to year in 2013 driven by lower margins in Power 
Systems, System x and Storage as well as a decline due to revenue 
mix, partially offset by margin improvement in System z. 
	
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased 
88.6 percent to $213 million in 2013. Pre-tax margin decreased 
9.6 points in 2013 versus 2012.
Global Financing
See pages 73 through 77 for an analysis of Global Financing’s seg-
ment results.


===== PAGE 61 =====
60
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total geographic revenue of $97,800 million decreased 4.4 per-
cent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Revenue in the 
major markets decreased 4.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency). Revenue from the growth markets, which represented 
approximately 23 percent of the total geographic revenue for the 
year, decreased 4.9 percent on a year-to-year basis (2 percent 
adjusted for currency). Performance at constant currency in the 
growth markets was mixed, with year-to-year growth in the first half 
offset by declines in the second half. The company had strength 
in Latin America and the Middle East and Africa region. How-
ever, declines in some of the larger growth markets, for example 
China and Australia, impacted the overall performance in the 
growth markets. Within the BRIC countries of Brazil, Russia, India 
and China, combined revenue declined 8.2 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency). 
	
Americas revenue decreased 2.9 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) year to year. The major market countries were down 
3.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency), partially offset by an 
increase in the Latin America growth markets of 4.4 percent (9 per-
cent adjusted for currency). Within the major market countries, 
the U.S. was down 3.4 percent and Canada was down 6.3 per-
cent (3 percent adjusted for currency). Within the growth market 
countries, Brazil increased 3.3 percent (10 percent adjusted for 
currency) and Mexico increased 7.8 percent (8 percent adjusted 
for currency).
	
Europe/Middle East/Africa revenue decreased 0.5 percent 
(2 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2012. The major 
market countries were down 0.5 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency), while the growth market countries were down 0.6 percent 
(up 1 percent adjusted for currency). In the major market countries, 
the UK decreased 1.4 percent (flat adjusted for currency), Germany 
decreased 0.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), France 
decreased 1.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency), and Italy 
decreased 2.1 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency). Within 
the EMEA growth markets, the Middle East and Africa region 
increased 5.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), but this 
growth was offset primarily by a decrease in Russia of 22.7 percent 
(22 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 11.6 percent (3 percent 
adjusted for currency) year to year. Japan revenue decreased 
15.2 percent as reported, but increased 4 percent overall and 
grew in every quarter on a constant currency basis. This growth 
reflected the benefits of shifting investment and redirection of the 
company’s go-to-market focus to improve performance in Japan. 
The Asia Pacific growth markets decreased 9.1 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency), with China down 12.2 percent (14 percent 
adjusted for currency) and Australia down 15.9 percent (10 per-
cent adjusted for currency). During 2013, performance in China 
was impacted by the process surrounding the implementation of 
a broad governmental economic reform plan.
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$28,440 
$27,821 
2.2%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(370)
(328)
12.9
Acquisition-related charges
(40)
(35)
14.9
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(433)
(274)
58.3
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$27,597
$27,184
1.5%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
28.9%
27.0%
1.9 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
28.1%
26.4%
1.7 pts.
Selling, General and Administrative
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and  
administrative  expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$19,178 
$19,532 
(1.8)%
Advertising and promotional 
expense
1,294
1,339
(3.4)
Workforce rebalancing charges
1,031
784
31.6
Retirement-related costs
986
932
5.8
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
370
328
12.9
Stock-based compensation
435
498
(12.6)
Bad debt expense
156
50
209.8
Total consolidated selling, general 
and administrative expense
$23,451
$23,463
(0.1)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(370)
(328)
12.9
Acquisition-related charges
(25)
(22)
13.3
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(376)
(294)
28.1
Operating (non-GAAP)  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$22,680
$22,820
(0.6)%


===== PAGE 62 =====
61
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total SG&A expense decreased 0.1 percent in 2013 versus 2012. 
The decrease was primarily driven by the effects of currency 
(1 point), offset by acquisition-related spending (2 points). Oper-
ating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 0.6 percent primarily 
driven by the effects of currency (1 point) and lower base spending 
(1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spending (1 point). 
The decrease was driven by lower SG&A—other expense, as the 
company continued to shift its spending. The company continued 
to drive productivity across the business, primarily through its 
enterprise productivity initiatives, and reinvested most of those 
savings into the business to drive its growth areas. The increase in 
workforce rebalancing charges was due to actions the company 
took in the second quarter of 2013. Bad debt expense increased 
$106 million in 2013 versus 2012, primarily driven by higher specific 
account reserves. The accounts receivable provision cover-
age was 1.6 percent at December 31, 2013, an increase of 20 
basis points from year-end 2012.
Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated research, 
development and engineering
$5,743 
$5,816 
(1.3)%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(57)
20
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) research, 
development and engineering
$5,686 
$5,837 
(2.6)%
NM—Not meaningful
Total RD&E expense decreased 1.3 percent in 2013 versus 2012, 
primarily driven by lower base spending (3 points), partially offset 
by acquisitions (2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense 
decreased 2.6 percent in 2013 compared to the prior year pri-
marily driven by lower base spending (5 points), partially offset by 
acquisitions (2 points).
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Sales and other transfers of 
intellectual property
$352
$   324
8.8%
Licensing/royalty-based fees
150
251
(40.1)
Custom development income
320
500
(36.0)
Total
$822 
$1,074 
(23.5)%
There were no significant individual IP transactions in 2013 or 
2012. Custom development income declined 36 percent com-
pared to the prior year due to a reduction in payments from the 
company’s technology alliance partners.
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction  
losses/(gains)
$(260)
$(240)
8.4%
(Gains)/losses on  
derivative instruments
166
72
132.5
Interest income
(74)
(109)
(32.2)
Net (gains)/losses from securities  
and investment assets
(29)
(55)
(48.0)
Other
(137)
(511)
(73.3)
Total consolidated other  
(income) and expense
$(333)
$(843)
(60.5)%
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related charges
(16)
(13)
17.4
Operating (non-GAAP) other 
(income) and expense
$(349)
$(857)
(59.3)%
The decrease in income of $510 million in 2013 was primarily driven 
by lower income from divestitures ($405 million) driven by the gain 
associated with the divested RSS business ($446 million) in 2012 
reflected in Other in the table above, and increased losses on 
derivative instruments ($95 million) due to foreign currency rate 
volatility year to year.
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2013
2012
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense 
Total
$402
$459
(12.5)%
The decrease in interest expense in 2013 versus 2012 was pri-
marily driven by lower average interest rates, partially offset by 
higher average debt levels. Overall interest expense, including 
interest presented in the cost of financing, and excluding capital-
ized interest, for 2013 was $989 million, a decrease of $15 million 
year to year.


===== PAGE 63 =====
62
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial Position
Cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2013 were 
$11,066 million, consistent with the prior year-end balance. During 
the year the company continued to manage the investment portfo-
lio to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives.
	
Total debt of $39,718 million increased $6,449 million from 
the December 31, 2012 level. The commercial paper balance at 
December 31, 2013, was $2,458 million, an increase of $658 mil-
lion. Within total debt, $27,504 million was in support of the Global 
Financing business which was leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 ratio. The 
company continued to have substantial flexibility in the market. 
During 2013, the company completed bond issuances totaling 
$10,956 million, with terms ranging from 2 to 12 years, and priced 
from 0.22 to 3.38 percent depending on maturity. 
	
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remea-
sured the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans 
at December 31. At December 31, 2013, the overall net under-
funded position was $11,434 million, a decrease of $8,756 million 
from December 31, 2012 driven by the increase in discount rates, 
primarily in the U.S. At year end, the company’s qualified defined 
benefit plans were well funded and the cash requirements related 
to these plans remain stable going forward at less than $700 mil-
lion per year through 2015. In 2013, the return on the U.S. Personal 
Pension Plan assets was 7.1 percent and the plan was 109 percent 
funded. Overall, global asset returns were 7.1 percent and the quali-
fied defined benefit plans worldwide were 102 percent funded. 
	
During 2013, the company generated $17,485 million in cash 
from operations, a decrease of $2,102 million compared to 2012. In 
addition, the company generated $15,021 million in free cash flow, 
a decrease of $3,164 million versus 2012. The company returned 
$17,917 million to shareholders in 2013, with $13,859 million in gross 
share repurchases and $4,058 million in dividends. In 2013 the 
company repurchased approximately 73 million shares and had 
approximately $14.7 billion remaining in share repurchase autho-
rization at year end.
Income Taxes
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2013 was 16.6 per-
cent, a decrease of 8.0 points versus the prior year, driven by the 
following factors:
•	 A benefit resulting from the completion of the U.S. 2008–2010 
tax audit, including associated reserve redeterminations 
(11.1 points);
•	 A benefit due to a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax 
income in 2013 (2.2 points); 
•	 Benefits from the retroactive impact of the 2012 American 
Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points) and an increase in research 
and development credits (0.5 points);
•	 A benefit from a tax agreement which required a reassess-
ment of certain valuation allowances on deferred tax assets 
(1.4 points); and,
•	 Benefits from the resolution of certain non-U.S. tax audits 
(0.7 points) and newly enacted U.S. state tax legislation 
(0.6 points); partially offset by
•	 Tax charges related to certain intercompany payments  
made by foreign subsidiaries and the intercompany licensing 
of certain IP (8.8 points); and 
•	 The year-over-year impact of the 2012 benefit related to a tax 
restructuring in Latin America (0.7 points).
The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 17.0 percent, a 
decrease of 7.3 points versus 2012 principally driven by the same 
factors described above.
Results of Discontinued Operations
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax was $398 million in 
2013 compared to $395 million in 2012. The discontinued opera-
tions effective tax rate in 2013 was 44.8 percent compared to 
38.1 percent in 2012.


===== PAGE 64 =====
63
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from 
similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 22 for the 
company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2013:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$48,684 
$ 394 
$  629
$49,706 
Gross profit margin
49.5%
0.4 pts.
0.6 pts.
50.5%
SG&A
$23,451 
$(394)
$ (376)
$22,680 
RD&E
5,743
—
(57)
5,686
Other (income) and expense
(333)
(16)
—
(349)
Total expense and other (income)
28,440
(410)
(433)
27,597
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
20,244
804
1,062
22,110
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
20.6%
0.8 pts.
1.1 pts.
22.5%
Provision for income taxes*
$  3,363
$   57 
$  333
$  3,753 
Effective tax rate
16.6%
(0.4) pts.
0.7 pts.
17.0%
Income from continuing operations 
$16,881
$ 747
$  729
$18,356
Income margin from continuing operations
17.2%
0.8 pts.
0.7 pts.
18.7%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$    (398 )
$   — 
$     —
$    (398 )
Net income
$16,483 
$ 747 
$  729
$17,959 
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations
$  15.30 
$0.68 
$ 0.66
$  16.64 
Discontinued operations
$   (0.36)
$   — 
$     —
$   (0.36 )
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2012:
GAAP
Acquisition-
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$50,361 
$ 376 
$ 264
$51,001 
Gross profit margin
49.0%
0.4 pts.
0.3 pts.
49.6%
SG&A
$23,463 
$(349)
$(294)
$22,820 
RD&E
5,816
—
20
5,837
Other (income) and expense
(843)
(13)
—
(857)
Total expense and other (income)
27,821
(363)
(274)
27,184
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
22,540
739
538
23,817
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
21.9%
0.7 pts.
0.5 pts.
23.2%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,541
$   98 
$ 156
$  5,795 
Effective tax rate
24.6%
(0.4) pts.
0.1 pts.
24.3%
Income from continuing operations 
$16,999
$ 641
$ 381
$18,022
Income margin from continuing operations
16.5%
0.6 pts.
0.4 pts.
17.5%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax 
$    (395)
$    —
$    —
$    (395)
Net income
$16,604 
$ 641 
$ 381
$17,627 
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations
$  14.71
$0.56 
$0.33 
$  15.60
Discontinued operations
$   (0.34)
$    — 
$    —
$   (0.34 )
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 65 =====
64
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
The company measures the success of its business model over 
the long term, not any individual quarter or year. The company’s 
strategies, investments and actions are all taken with an objective of 
optimizing long-term performance. A long-term perspective ensures 
that the company is well-positioned to take advantage of major 
shifts occurring in technology, business and the global economy.
	
Within the IT industry, there are major shifts occurring—driven 
by data, cloud and changes in the ways individuals and enterprises 
are engaging. In 2014, the company had strong performance in 
its strategic imperatives that are focused on these market shifts. 
Revenue from the company’s cloud, analytics, mobile, social and 
security solutions together increased 16 percent compared to 
2013, including the impacts of currency and the divested indus-
try standard server business. In total, the strategic imperatives 
generated $25 billion in revenue, approximately 27 percent of 
total consolidated revenue, including software content that rep-
resented a higher percentage than the overall company. As a 
result, the strategic imperatives deliver gross profit margins that 
are better than the consolidated gross profit margin on average. 
In 2014, the company continued to take significant actions to drive 
the shift towards its strategic imperatives with targeted invest-
ments, as well as moving away from areas that do not support the 
strategic profile.
	
The company’s strategic direction is clear and compelling, and 
the company has been successful in shifting to the higher value 
areas of enterprise IT. The strong revenue growth in the strategic 
imperatives confirms that, as does the overall profitability of the 
business. The company expects the industry to continue to shift. 
The company expects revenue from its strategic imperatives to 
continue to grow at a double-digit rate. These offerings are as high 
value as other parts of the business, which continue to manage cli-
ents’ most critical business processes. As the cloud business gets 
to scale, and with ongoing productivity improvements across the 
business, the company expects to have an opportunity to expand 
margin. In addition, the company expects to continue to allocate 
its capital efficiently and effectively to investments, and to return 
value to its shareholders through a combination of dividends and 
share repurchases. Over the longer term, in considering the oppor-
tunities it will continue to develop, the company expects to have 
the ability to generate low single-digit revenue growth, and with a 
higher value business mix, high single-digit operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share growth, with free cash flow realization in the 
90’s percent range. This is a longer term growth trajectory, not an 
absolute end point or a multi-year objective. 
	
In the near term, there are a few dynamics that are incon-
sistent with that longer term trajectory. Specifically, in 2015, the 
company will be managing certain transitions in the business. As 
an example, while it is fully participating in the shift to cloud, the 
margins in that business are impacted by the level of investment 
the company is making, and the fact that the business is not yet 
at scale. The company expects an improvement in margin in 2015 
as the business ramps, but, it will not yet be at scale. In addition, 
the company expects a continued impact to its software transac-
tion revenue growth, as customers continue to utilize the flexibility 
that the company has provided to them, as they commit to the 
company’s platform for the longer term. There are also cyclical 
considerations. Given the geographic breadth of the business, the 
company has seen challenges in some of its markets—notably 
many of the growth markets. The company continues to believe 
that these are important markets over time, and it continues to 
invest to capture these opportunities. However, the company is 
not expecting a robust demand environment in many geographies 
in 2015. The company also expects a continued impact from cur-
rency in 2015. At January 2015 spot rates, the impact to revenue 
growth is expected to be 5–6 points, but, as with all companies 
with a similar global business profile, with the dollar strengthen-
ing, the company also expects that currency will have a significant 
translation impact on its profit growth. The company also expects 
some cyclical benefits in 2015, including the new mainframe 
product cycle and a full year of POWER8 availability. 
	
Overall, looking forward to 2015, the company expects to con-
tinue to grow in many areas of the business. It expects to deliver 
strong growth in the strategic imperatives and margin expansion, 
while continuing a high level of investment and hiring, shifting 
to areas that have the best opportunity. However, in the current 
currency environment, and considering the impact from the 
completed divestitures, total revenue as reported is not expected 
to grow in 2015. The company expects to have less workforce 
rebalancing charges in 2015 versus 2014, and while it may have 
certain gains, it does not expect to replicate the $1.8 billion of gains 
recorded in 2014, resulting in a net impact to profit growth. Overall, 
the company expects GAAP earnings per share from continuing 
operations for 2015 to be in the range of $14.35 to $15.10, and oper-
ating (non-GAAP) earnings per share to be in the range of $15.75 
to $16.50. For the first quarter of 2015, the company expects mid 
single-digit earnings per share growth from continuing operations 
compared to the first quarter of 2014, primarily driven by the large 
workforce rebalancing charge that was taken in the prior year. 
Overall, and most importantly, the company expects to exit 2015 
with a higher-value, higher-margin business. 
	
Within the company’s earnings per share expectation for 
2015, the company is expecting a 2–3 point benefit from share 
repurchases—less than the impact in 2014. The company enters 
2015 with approximately $6.3 billion of repurchase authorization 
remaining, and the company is assuming it will utilize the majority 
of the remaining authorization in 2015. The timing of repurchases 
will determine the final impact to earnings per share in 2015. 
	
From a segment perspective, the company expects that the 
launch of the new mainframe, along with the success in POWER8 
that the company experienced in the fourth quarter of 2014, will 
generate momentum in 2015. As a result, excluding the impact 
of divestitures, the company expects Systems and Technol-
ogy to deliver revenue growth in the mid-single digits in 2015. 
Within Global Services, the company has not assumed a revenue 


===== PAGE 66 =====
65
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
trajectory that requires significant growth within its earnings 
expectations. As indicated above, the company has established 
a range for its earnings expectation for 2015. The performance 
of the Software business is key to this range—the low end of the 
expected range assumes no improvement in trajectory for the 
Software business, while the high end of the range assumes a 
stabilization of the Software business relative to 2014. 
	
The company’s free cash flow performance in 2014 compared 
to the prior year was impacted by operational performance, an 
increase in cash tax payments and working capital impacts related 
to the industry standard server divestiture. Looking forward to 
2015, at the level of expected profit, the company expects free 
cash flow to be relatively flat compared to 2014. From a free 
cash flow to income from continuing operations perspective, 
free cash flow realization was 79 percent as reported in 2014 
and is expected to improve to the mid-80’s percent level in 2015. 
In 2014, realization was impacted by higher cash tax payments 
and the gain associated with the industry standard server dives-
titure. While these impacts are not expected to be as significant 
in 2015, the company expects to increase capital investments by 
approximately $0.5 billion in 2015 driven by the continued buildout 
of the SoftLayer cloud platform. In addition, the company expects 
impacts to realization in 2015 from the timing of payments related 
to workforce rebalancing actions taken in 2014 and working capital 
impacts related to the industry standard server divestiture. Over-
all, with a year-to-year profit decline expected, and the impacts 
described from capital investments, workforce rebalancing and 
working capital, all this results in the expectation that free cash 
flow will be essentially flat year to year.
	
The company expects, in the normal course of business, that 
its effective tax rate and operating (non-GAAP) tax rate will be 
approximately 20 percent in 2015. The rate will change year to year 
based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of income 
tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors 
including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the timing 
and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local taxes 
and the effects of various global income tax strategies. 
	
The company expects 2015 pre-tax retirement-related plan 
cost to be approximately $2.5 billion, an increase of approximately 
$500 million compared to 2014. This estimate reflects current 
pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2014. Within total 
retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan 
cost is expected to be approximately $1.6 billion, a decrease of 
approximately $100 million versus 2014. Non-operating retirement-
related plan cost is expected to be approximately $900 million, an 
increase of approximately $600 million compared to 2014, driven 
by increased recognized actuarial losses. Cash disbursements for 
all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately $2.7 
billion in 2015, an increase of approximately $100 million compared 
to 2014. See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131 
to 145 for additional information.
	
For a discussion of new accounting standards that the com-
pany will adopt in future periods, please see note B, “Accounting 
Changes” beginning on page 96.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from 
operations, providing a source of funds ranging between $16.9 
billion and $19.8 billion per year over the past five years. The com-
pany provides for additional liquidity through several sources: 
maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global funding 
sources, a committed global credit facility and other committed 
and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. The following table 
provides a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years 
ended December 31, 2010 through 2014.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
($ in billions)
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
Net cash from  
operating activities
$16.9 
$17.5 
$19.6 
$19.8 
$19.5 
Cash and short-term  
marketable securities
$  8.5 
$11.1 
$11.1 
$11.9 
$11.7 
Committed global  
credit facility
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securi-
ties at December 31, 2014 appear in the following table and remain 
unchanged from December 31, 2013. The company’s indenture 
governing its debt securities and its various credit facilities each 
contain significant covenants which obligate the company to 
promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount 
of secured indebtedness and sale and leaseback transactions to 
10 percent of the company’s consolidated net tangible assets, 
and restrict the company’s ability to merge or consolidate unless 
certain conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a cov-
enant on the company’s consolidated net interest expense ratio, 
which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default 
provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness of at least 
$500 million. 
	
The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt 
covenants and provides periodic certification to its lenders. The 
failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event 
of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply. 
If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest 
on the debt to which such event of default applied would become 
immediately due and payable. 
	
The company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in its 
debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders 
to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate payments 
thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. The com-
pany’s contractual agreements governing derivative instruments 
contain standard market clauses which can trigger the termination 
of the agreement if the company’s credit rating were to fall below 
investment grade. At December 31, 2014, the fair value of those 
instruments that were in a liability position was $196 million, before 
any applicable netting, and this position is subject to fluctuations 


===== PAGE 67 =====
66
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in fair value period to period based on the level of the company’s 
outstanding instruments and market conditions. The company has 
no other contractual arrangements that, in the event of a change in 
credit rating, would result in a material adverse effect on its finan-
cial position or liquidity.
Standard 
& Poor’s
Moody’s 
Investors 
Service
Fitch 
Ratings
Senior long-term debt
AA-
Aa3
A+
Commercial paper
A-1+
Prime-1
F1
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow 
presentation on page 83 and highlights causes and events under-
lying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 44. For the 
purpose of running its business, the company manages, monitors 
and analyzes cash flows in a different format.
	
Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the 
company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evalu-
ate strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and 
need to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term 
under GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash 
flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures. The com-
pany defines free cash flow as net cash from operating activities 
less the change in Global Financing receivables and net capital 
expenditures, including the investment in software. A key objective 
of the Global Financing business is to generate strong returns on 
equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a financing 
business. Accordingly, management considers Global Financ-
ing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working 
capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering 
Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net 
operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by 
the company as free cash flow.
	
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in 
2014, after investing $3.8 billion in capital investments, the com-
pany generated free cash flow of $12.4 billion, a decrease of $2.6 
billion compared to 2013. The decrease was driven by higher cash 
tax payments ($1.7 billion), the company’s operational performance 
and changes in working capital associated with the divestiture of 
the industry standard server business.
	
In 2014, the company continued to focus its cash utilization on 
returning value to shareholders including $4.3 billion in dividends 
and $13.0 billion in net stock transactions, including the common 
stock repurchase program. In addition, $0.7 billion was utilized for 
six acquisitions this year.
	
Over the past five years, the company generated over $78 bil-
lion in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested 
$15 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $79 billion 
to shareholders through dividends and net share repurchases. 
The company’s performance during this period demonstrates 
that there is fungibility across the elements of share repurchases, 
dividends and acquisitions. The amount of prospective returns 
to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases 
will vary based upon several factors including each year’s oper-
ating results, capital expenditure requirements, research and 
development investments and acquisitions, as well as the factors 
discussed below.
	
The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider 
the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2014, the Board 
of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock 
dividend from $0.95 to $1.10 per share.
	
The table below represents the way in which management 
reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP
$ 16.9
$ 17.5 
$ 19.6
$ 19.8
$ 19.5 
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables
0.7
(1.3)
(2.9)
(0.8)
(0.7)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding  
Global Financing receivables
16.2
18.8
22.5
20.7
20.3
Capital expenditures, net
(3.8)
(3.8)
(4.3)
(4.1)
(4.0)
Free cash flow (FCF)
12.4
15.0
18.2
16.6
16.3
Acquisitions
(0.7)
(3.1)
(3.7)
(1.8)
(5.9)
Divestitures
2.4
0.3
0.6
0.0
0.1
Share repurchase
(13.7)
(13.9)
(12.0)
(15.0)
(15.4)
Dividends
(4.3)
(4.1)
(3.8)
(3.5)
(3.2)
Non-Global Financing debt
(1.3)
3.2
0.7
1.7
2.3
Other (includes Global Financing receivables  
and Global Financing debt) 
2.6
2.4
(0.8)
2.3
3.5
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term  
marketable securities
$  (2.6)
$  (0.1)
$  (0.8)
$   0.3
$   (2.3)
FCF as percent of Income from Continuing Operations
  79%
89%
107%
103%
108%


===== PAGE 68 =====
67
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow 
dynamics discussed above include significant changes in oper-
ating results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, 
unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding 
requirements during periods of severe downturn in the capital mar-
kets or the timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such 
an adverse impact will depend on a number of variables, which 
are more completely described in note M, “Contingencies and 
Commitments,” on pages 122 to 124. With respect to pension fund-
ing, in 2014, the company contributed $519 million to its non-U.S. 
defined benefit plans versus $507 million in 2013. As highlighted in 
the Contractual Obligations table, the company expects to make 
legally mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. 
plans of approximately $3.0 billion in the next five years. The 2015 
contributions are currently expected to be approximately $600 
million. Cash disbursements related to all retirement-related plans 
is expected to be approximately $2.7 billion in 2015, an increase 
of approximately $0.1 billion compared to 2014. Financial market 
performance could increase the legally mandated minimum con-
tributions in certain non-U.S. countries that require more frequent 
remeasurement of the funded status. The company is not quan-
tifying any further impact from pension funding because it is not 
possible to predict future movements in the capital markets or 
pension plan funding regulations.
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in 
2006, and, among other things, increased the funding require-
ments for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after 
December 31, 2007. No mandatory contribution is required for 
the U.S. defined benefit plan in 2015 as of December 31, 2014.
	
The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund 
its current domestic operations and obligations, including invest-
ing and financing activities such as dividends and debt service. 
The company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows, 
and, in those circumstances where the company has additional 
cash requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity 
options available. These options may include the ability to borrow 
additional funds at reasonable interest rates, utilizing its commit-
ted global credit facility, repatriating certain foreign earnings and 
utilizing intercompany loans with certain foreign subsidiaries. 
	
The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax 
income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely 
reinvest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and 
accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made 
on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company 
periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent 
that it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantifica-
tion of the deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely 
reinvested earnings is not practicable. While the company cur-
rently does not have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign 
subsidiaries, if these funds are needed for operations and obliga-
tions in the U.S., the company could elect to repatriate these funds 
which could result in a reassessment of the company’s policy and 
increased tax expense.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual 
Payment Stream
Payments Due In
2015
2016–17
2018–19
After 2019
Long-term debt obligations
$39,708
$  4,586
$10,564
$  6,686
$17,872
Interest on long-term debt obligations
10,437
1,120
2,036
1,437
5,845
Capital (finance) lease obligations
29
13
9
4
2
Operating lease obligations
6,152
1,350
2,149
1,602
1,051
Purchase obligations
1,227
680
437
72
38
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit plan pension funding (mandated)*
3,000
600
1,200
1,200
—
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
1,730
71
149
158
1,352
Long-term termination benefits
1,823
733
209
153
728
Tax reserves**
3,642
995
Divestiture related
2,391
1,344
799
184
65
Other
1,018
134
200
111
574
Total
$71,157
$11,625
$17,751
$11,607
$27,527
  * As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2019 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $995 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the 
next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the 
progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months. 


===== PAGE 69 =====
68
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total contractual obligations are reported in the previous table 
excluding the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal 
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the table 
above as their future cash outflows are uncertain. This includes 
deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability benefits and 
other sundry items. Certain obligations related to the company’s 
completed divestitures and the definitive agreement to divest its 
Microelectronics business are included.
	
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase 
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet 
any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the 
company would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, 
or (3) the company must make specified minimum payments even 
if it does not take delivery of the contracted products or services 
(take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or services 
is noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in 
the table above. If the obligation is cancelable, but the company 
would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the pen-
alty is included as a purchase obligation. Contracted minimum 
amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts are also included in 
the table as they represent the portion of each contract that is a 
firm commitment.
	
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into 
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a 
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or 
service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally 
entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. 
They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased 
and, therefore, the company does not consider them to be pur-
chase obligations.
	
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the 
effective interest rate at December 31, 2014, plus the interest rate 
spread associated with that debt, if any. 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet 
arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release 67 
(FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con­
tractual Obligations.”
	
At December 31, 2014, the company had no off-balance sheet 
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material 
current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial 
condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquid-
ity, capital expenditures or capital resources. See the table on 
page 67 for the company’s contractual obligations, and note M, 
“Contingencies and Commitments,” on page 124, for detailed infor-
mation about the company’s guarantees, financial commitments 
and indemnification arrangements. The company does not have 
retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities 
or other material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires the company to make esti-
mates and assumptions about certain items and future events that 
directly affect its reported financial condition. The accounting esti-
mates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that 
the company considers to be the most critical to its financial state-
ments. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the 
nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels 
of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a 
reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption 
is material to the company’s financial condition. Senior manage-
ment has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of 
these estimates with the Audit Committee of the company’s Board 
of Directors. The company’s significant accounting policies are 
described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 
86 through 96.
	
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that infor-
mation is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and 
provides material information to investors. The amounts used to 
assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to 
allow users of the Annual Report to understand a general direction 
cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent 
management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, 
it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as fore-
casted, and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
Pension Assumptions
For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measure-
ment of the company’s benefit obligation to employees and 
net periodic pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain 
assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount rates 
and expected return on plan assets.
	
Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the 
(gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the net 
periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected ben-
efit obligation (PBO). The company decreased the discount rate 
assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based 
defined benefit plan, by 80 basis points to 3.70 percent on Decem-
ber 31, 2014. This change will increase pre-tax cost and expense 
recognized in 2015 by an estimated $272 million. If the discount 
rate assumption for the PPP had increased by 80 basis points on 
December 31, 2014, pre-tax cost and expense recognized in 2015 
would have decreased by an estimated $288 million. Changes 
in the discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which, 
in turn, may impact the company’s funding decisions if the PBO 
exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the 
discount rate would cause a corresponding decrease or increase, 
respectively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.4 billion based 
upon December 31, 2014 data. 


===== PAGE 70 =====
69
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption 
is used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. 
Expected returns on plan assets are calculated based on the 
market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in 
the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period 
in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension 
(income)/cost. The differences between the actual return on plan 
assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets are rec-
ognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets line 
in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component 
of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized over the service 
lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, 
provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are based upon 
the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by 
accounting standards.
	
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such 
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in 
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption 
would have an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, of 
$264 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension 
(income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, 
2014 and assuming no contributions are made in 2015).
	
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be 
required, by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual 
results that differ from the estimates may result in more or less 
future company funding into the pension plans than is planned 
by management. Impacts of these types of changes on the com-
pany’s pension plans in other countries worldwide would vary 
depending upon the status of each respective plan.
	
In addition to the above, the company evaluates other pension 
assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement 
age and mortality, and updates these assumptions to reflect expe-
rience and expectations for the future. Actual results in any given 
year can differ from actuarial assumptions because of economic 
and other factors.
	
For additional information on the company’s pension plans and 
the development of these assumptions, see Note S, “Retirement-
Related Benefits,” on pages 137 and 138.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related 
to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the 
company to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, com-
plex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may 
require significant contract interpretation to determine the appro-
priate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in 
a multiple-deliverable arrangement should be treated as separate 
units of accounting. Other significant judgments include deter-
mining whether IBM or a reseller is acting as the principal in a 
transaction and whether separate contracts are considered part 
of one arrangement.
	
Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability 
to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. 
The company considers various factors, including a review of spe-
cific transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, historical 
experience and market and economic conditions when calculating 
these provisions and allowances. Evaluations are conducted each 
quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates 
were changed by 10 percent in 2014, net income would have been 
impacted by $78 million (excluding Global Financing receivables).
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
The company enters into numerous service contracts through its 
Global Services business. During the contractual period, revenue, 
cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate 
profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which the 
company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method 
of accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate the POC 
contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the 
remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. The 
company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its POC-based 
services contracts in order to determine whether the latest esti-
mates require updating. Key factors reviewed by the company to 
estimate the future costs to complete each contract are future 
labor costs, future product costs and expected productivity effi-
ciencies. Contract loss provisions recorded as a component of 
other accrued expenses and liabilities were approximately $13 
million and $41 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Income Taxes
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous 
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in deter-
mining the consolidated provision for income taxes.
	
During the ordinary course of business, there are many trans-
actions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is 
uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based 
on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. 
These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s 
belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company 
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon 
review by tax authorities. The company believes that its accruals 
for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on 
its assessment of many factors, including past experience and 
interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates 
and assumptions, and may involve a series of complex judgments 
about future events. To the extent that new information becomes 
available which causes the company to change its judgment 
regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to 
tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which 
such determination is made.
	
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valua-
tion allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing 
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all 
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating 
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of 
ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event that the company 
changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets 
that can be realized, the company will adjust its valuation allow-
ance with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the 
period in which such determination is made.


===== PAGE 71 =====
70
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period 
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement 
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring 
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the 
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local 
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies.
	
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations 
before income taxes, consolidated net income would have 
decreased/improved by $200 million in 2014.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment account-
ing requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. 
The acquisition method of accounting for business combinations 
requires the company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, 
liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree 
to properly allocate purchase price consideration between assets 
that are depreciated and amortized from goodwill and indefinite-
lived intangible assets. Impairment testing for assets, other than 
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, requires the alloca-
tion of cash flows to those assets or group of assets and if required, 
an estimate of fair value for the assets or group of assets. The 
company’s estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be 
reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. 
These valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, 
which would not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances 
that may occur.
Valuation of Goodwill
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually, in the 
fourth quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances 
indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. 
	
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its 
reporting units that carry goodwill including relevant events and 
circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units. Exam-
ples include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic, industry and 
market conditions; as well as other individual factors such as: 
•	 A loss of key personnel;
•	 A significant adverse shift in the operating environment of  
the reporting unit such as unanticipated competition;
•	 A significant pending litigation;
•	 A more likely than not expectation that a reporting  
unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold  
or otherwise disposed of; and
•	 An adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine 
whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative good-
will impairment test. This quantitative test is required only if the 
company concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting 
unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. 
	
In the fourth quarter, the company performed its annual good-
will impairment analysis. The qualitative assessment illustrated 
evidence of a potential impairment triggering event as a result of 
the financial performance of the Systems and Technology report-
ing unit. The quantitative analysis resulted in no impairment as the 
reporting unit’s estimated fair value exceeded the carrying amount 
by over 100 percent.
Loss Contingencies
The company is currently involved in various claims and legal 
proceedings. At least quarterly, the company reviews the status 
of each significant matter and assesses its potential financial 
exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceed-
ing is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably 
estimated, the company accrues a liability for the estimated loss. 
Significant judgment is required in both the determination of 
probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is 
reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these 
matters, accruals are based only on the best information available 
at the time. As additional information becomes available, the com-
pany reassesses the potential liability related to its pending claims 
and litigation, and may revise its estimates. These revisions in the 
estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact 
on the company’s results of operations and financial position. 
Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses 
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables 
port­folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A 
description of the methods used by management to estimate the 
amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Signifi-
cant Accounting Policies,” on page 95. Factors that could result in 
actual receivable losses that are materially different from the estim­
ated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant 
change in the economic health of a particular client that represents 
a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.
	
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from manage-
ment’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global 
Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s income 
from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher 
or lower by an estimated $58 million (using 2014 data), depending 
upon whether the actual collectibility was better or worse, respec-
tively, than the estimates.
Residual Value 
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment 
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates 
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as oper-
ating or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of 
leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current 
market for new and used equipment, and obtaining forward-look-
ing product information such as marketing plans and technological 
innovations. Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed 
and “other than temporary” declines in estimated future residual 
values are recognized upon identification. Anticipated increases 
in future residual values are not recognized until the equipment 
is remarketed. 


===== PAGE 72 =====
71
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from 
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment 
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations 
and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment.
	
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than 
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s seg-
ment pre-tax income and the company’s income from continuing 
operations before income taxes for 2014 would have been lower 
by an estimated $84 million. If the actual residual value recovery is 
higher than management’s estimates, the increase in income will 
be realized at the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed.
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. 
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position. 
At December 31, 2014, currency changes resulted in assets and 
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into 
fewer dollars than at year-end 2013. The company uses financial 
hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks related to 
financing transactions and other foreign currency-based trans-
actions. Further discussion of currency and hedging appears in 
note D, “Financial Instruments-Derivative Financial Instruments,” 
on pages 105 through 109. 
	
Foreign currency fluctuations often drive operational responses 
that mitigate the simple mechanical translation of earnings. During 
periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and 
competition adjust to the changing rates. For example, when pric-
ing offerings in the marketplace, the company may use some of 
the advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve its position 
competitively, and price more aggressively to win the business, 
essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage to 
its customers. Competition will frequently take the same action. 
Consequently, the company believes that some of the currency-
based changes in cost impact the prices charged to clients. The 
company also maintains currency hedging programs for cash 
management purposes which mitigate, but do not eliminate, the 
volatility of currency impacts on the company’s financial results. 
	
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. 
References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” 
reflect adjustments based upon a simple constant currency math-
ematical translation of local currency results using the comparable 
prior period’s currency conversion rate. However, this constant 
currency methodology that the company utilizes to disclose this 
information does not incorporate any operational actions that 
management may take in reaction to fluctuating currency rates. 
Currency movements impacted the company’s year-to-year reve-
nue and earnings per share growth in 2014. Based on the currency 
rate movements in 2014, total revenue decreased 5.7 percent as 
reported and 4.0 percent at constant currency versus 2013. On 
an income from continuing operations before income taxes basis, 
these translation impacts offset by the net impact of hedging activ-
ities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing or 
sourcing actions) decrease of approximately $300 million in 2014. 
The same mathematical exercise resulted in a decrease of approx-
imately $400 million in 2013. The company views these amounts as 
a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported financial results. 
Considering the operational responses mentioned above, move-
ments of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of hedging 
instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts on 
any particular period, but the company believes it could be sub-
stantially less than the theoretical maximum given the competitive 
pressure in the marketplace.
	
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. 
dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, 
translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations. 
Generally, the company manages currency risk in these entities 
by linking prices and contracts to U.S. dollars. 
	
The company continues to monitor the economic conditions 
in Venezuela. In March 2013, the Venezuelan government created 
a new foreign exchange mechanism called the “Complimentary 
System of Foreign Currency Acquirement” (or the “SICAD 1”). This 
system operates similar to an auction system and allows entities 
in specific sectors to bid for U.S. dollars to be used for specific 
import transactions. In December 2013, the Venezuelan gov-
ernment published the SICAD 1 rate implied by the transactions 
settled in these auctions, and issued Exchange Agreement No. 
24 which clarified the use of the SICAD 1 mechanism. In Janu-
ary 2014, the government issued Exchange Agreement No. 25, 
and significantly expanded the transactions that qualify for use of 
SICAD 1 and stated that a new agency called the National Center of 
Foreign Commerce (CENCOEX) would assume the role of CADIVI, 
which historically controlled the sale and purchase of foreign cur-
rency in Venezuela. In February 2014, the Venezuelan government 
signed into law a plan to open a new exchange control mechanism 
(“SICAD 2”), and indicated that the official rate of 6.3 BsF per USD 
would increasingly be reserved for the settlement of USD denomi-
nated obligations related to purchases of “essential goods and 
services.” In March 2014, the Venezuelan government published 
operating rules for SICAD 2 in Exchange Agreement No. 27. SICAD 
2 began operating on March 24, 2014. In March 2014, the company 
adopted the SICAD 1 rate of 10.7 BsF per USD. In the first quarter 
of 2014, the company recorded a pre-tax loss of $31 million as 
a result of the devaluation in Other (income) and expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2014, the 
company’s net asset position in Venezuela was $42 million. The 
company’s operations in Venezuela comprised less than 1 percent 
of total 2014, 2013 and 2012 revenue, respectively. In February 2015, 
the Venezuelan government created a new foreign exchange plat-
form, the Marginal Currency System, or SIMADI. The company will 
monitor transactions from this new system going forward in 2015.


===== PAGE 73 =====
72
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
In January 2014, the Argentinian government devalued its cur-
rency from 6 pesos to the U.S. dollar to 8 pesos to the U.S. dollar. 
This devaluation did not have a material impact given the size of 
the company’s operations in Argentina (less than 1 percent of total 
2014 revenue).
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the com-
pany is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the 
market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements 
on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and 
liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts 
receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets.
	
The company regularly assesses these risks and has estab-
lished policies and business practices to protect against the 
adverse effects of these and other potential exposures. As a 
result, the company does not anticipate any material losses from 
these risks.
	
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing busi-
ness and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, 
contains an element of market risk from changes in interest and 
currency rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through 
the use of a variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as 
described in note D, “Financial Instruments—Derivative Financial 
Instruments,” on pages 105 through 109.
	
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a 
sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk expo-
sures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other 
financial instruments.
	
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity 
analysis are comprised of the company’s cash and cash equiva-
lents, marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, 
commercial financing and installment payment receivables, 
investments, long-term and short-term debt and derivative finan-
cial instruments. The company’s derivative financial instruments 
generally include interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and 
forward contracts.
	
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the 
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes 
in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-
sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign 
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present value 
of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that are 
attributable to the market risk being measured. The discount 
rates used for the present value computations were selected 
based on market interest and foreign currency exchange rates 
in effect at December 31, 2014 and 2013. The differences in this 
comparison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated with 
each type of risk.
	
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not neces-
sarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the company 
would incur under normal market conditions because, due to prac-
tical limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk 
factor are held constant. In addition, the results of the model are 
constrained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded 
from the analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the 
financing or hedging of those items are included by definition. 
Excluded items include short-term and long-term receivables 
from sales-type and direct financing leases, forecasted foreign 
currency cash flows and the company’s net investment in foreign 
operations. As a consequence, reported changes in the values 
of some of the financial instruments impacting the results of the 
sensitivity analysis are not matched with the offsetting changes 
in the values of the items that those instruments are designed to 
finance or hedge.
	
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2014 and 
2013, are as follows: 
Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2014, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of inter-
est rates with all other variables held constant would result in a 
decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments 
of $123 million as compared with a decrease of $322 million at 
December 31, 2013. A 10 percent increase in the levels of inter-
est rates with all other variables held constant would result in an 
increase in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of 
$119 million as compared to an increase of $300 million at Decem-
ber 31, 2013. Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of 
the company’s financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical 
changes in the level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes 
in the company’s debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount. 
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
At December 31, 2014, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against 
foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would 
result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial 
instruments of $872 million as compared with an increase of $1,340 
million at December 31, 2013. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger 
U.S. dollar against foreign currencies, with all other variables 
held constant, would result in a decrease in the fair value of the 
company’s financial instruments of $872 million compared with a 
decrease of $1,340 million at December 31, 2013. The change in 
impact from 2013 to 2014 was comprised of: a decrease in assets 
($123 million), an increase in debt ($362 million) and an increase in 
derivatives ($230 million). 
Financing Risks
See the “Description of Business” on page 31 for a discussion of 
the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business 
and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.


===== PAGE 74 =====
73
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in 
more than 175 countries and is continuing to shift its business to 
the higher value segments of enterprise IT. The decrease in total 
resources from 2013 to 2014 was primarily due to divestitures in 
2014, which drove a reduction of approximately 35,000 resources. 
The company continues to remix its skills and resource needs to 
match the best opportunities in the marketplace. 
	
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equiv-
alent full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and 
limited- term employment arrangements to meet specific business 
needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
GLOBAL FINANCING 
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a 
stand-alone entity. 
	
In 2014, the Global Financing business remained focused on 
its core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s 
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing deliv-
ered external revenue of $2,034 million and total revenue of $4,522 
million, and expanded gross margin. Total pre-tax income of $2,189 
million increased 0.8 percent compared to 2013 and return on 
equity was 36.8 percent.
	
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact 
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results 
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact 
Global Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both 
financing revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Origi-
nations, which determine the asset base of Global Financing’s 
annuity-like business, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing 
sales and services volumes and Global Financing’s participation 
rates. Participation rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to 
finance their transactions through Global Financing in lieu of paying 
IBM up-front cash or financing through a third party. 
Results of Operations
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
External revenue
$2,034
$2,022 
$2,013 
Internal revenue
2,488
2,282
2,060
Total revenue
4,522
4,304
4,073
Cost
1,428
1,417
1,400
Gross profit
$3,094
$2,888 
$2,673 
Gross profit margin
68.4%
67.1%
65.6%
Pre-tax income
$2,189
$2,171 
$2,034 
After-tax income*
$1,462
$1,456 
$1,362 
Return on equity*
36.8%
40.6%
41.0%
* See page 77 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation. 
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2014–13
2013–12
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries
379,592*
431,212
434,246
(12.0)%
(0.7)%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries
8,862
9,018
8,009
(1.7)
12.6
Complementary
24,321
23,555
24,740
3.3
(4.8)
* Reflects reduction of approximately 35,000 resources due to divestitures in 2014. 
Cybersecurity
The company’s approach on cybersecurity leverages its ability 
to adapt to a changing environment, as well as the depth and 
breadth of its global capabilities, both in terms of its offerings 
to clients and its internal approaches to risk management. The 
company has commercial solutions that deliver identity and 
access management, data security, application security, network 
security and endpoint security. IBM’s solutions include a security 
intelligence dashboard that can collect information on customer 
IT security events and provide detailed information to custom-
ers about potential threats and security posture. The company’s 
services businesses offer professional solutions for security from 
assessment to deployment. In addition, the company offers man-
aged and outsourced security solutions from multiple security 
operations centers around the world. Finally, security is embed-
ded in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure engineering 
processes and by critical functions (encryption, access control, 
etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.
	
From an enterprise perspective, IBM implements a multi-
faceted risk-management approach to identify and address 
cybersecurity risks. The company has established policies and 
procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s infrastruc-
ture and data are managed. IBM performs ongoing assessments 
regarding its technical controls and its methods for identifying 
emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The company uses a 
layered approach with overlapping controls to defend against 
cybersecurity attacks on networks, end-user devices, datacen-
ters and applications. The company also has a global incident 
response process to respond to cybersecurity threats. In addition, 
the company utilizes a combination of online training, educational 
tools, and other awareness initiatives to foster a culture of security 
awareness and responsibility among its workforce.


===== PAGE 75 =====
74
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2014 increased $218 million versus 2013 as a 
result of:
•	 An increase in internal revenue of 9.0 percent driven by an 
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 11.1 percent to 
$2,080 million); partially offset by a decrease in financing 
revenue (down 0.7 percent to $408 million); and 
•	 An increase in external revenue of 0.6 percent (up 3 percent 
adjusted for currency) driven by an increase in financing  
revenue (up 3.4 percent to $1,543 million), partially offset by a 
decrease in used equipment sales revenue (down 7.2 percent 
to $491 million).
The decrease in internal financing revenue was primarily due to 
lower asset yields, partially offset by an increase in the average 
asset balance. The increase in external financing revenue was 
due to a higher average asset balance, partially offset by lower 
asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. Global 
Financing gross profit increased 7.2 percent compared to 2013 due 
to an increase in used equipment sales gross profit, partially offset 
by a decrease in financing gross profit. The gross profit margin 
increased 1.3 points due to an increase in the equipment sales 
margin, partially offset by a decrease in the financing margin. 
	
Total revenue in 2013 increased $232 million versus 2012 as a 
result of:
•	 An increase in internal revenue of 10.8 percent driven by an 
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 20.0 percent 
to $1,871 million), partially offset by a decrease in financing 
revenue (down 17.9 percent to $411 million); and
•	 An increase in external revenue of 0.4 percent (3 percent 
adjusted for currency) driven by an increase in financing  
revenue (up 1.4 percent to $1,493 million), partially offset by a 
decrease in used equipment sales revenue (down 2.3 per-
cent to $528 million).
The decrease in internal financing revenue was primarily due to 
lower asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. 
The increase in external financing revenue was due to a higher 
average asset balance, partially offset by lower asset yields and 
a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. Global Financing gross 
profit in 2013 increased 8.0 percent compared to 2012 due to 
an increase in used equipment sales gross profit, partially offset 
by a decrease in financing gross profit. The gross profit margin 
increased 1.5 points due to an increase in equipment sales mar-
gins, partially offset by a shift in mix toward lower margin used 
equipment sales.
	
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 0.8 percent in 
2014 versus 2013, following an increase of 6.8 percent in 2013 
versus 2012. The increase in 2014 was driven by the increase in 
gross profit ($207 million), partially offset by increases in financ-
ing receivables provisions ($155 million) and SG&A expenses ($32 
million). The increase in 2013 was driven by the increase in gross 
profit ($215 million), partially offset by increases in financing receiv-
ables provisions ($60 million) and SG&A expenses ($20 million). 
The increase in financing receivable provisions in 2014 was due to 
higher specific reserve requirements, primarily in China and Latin 
America. At December 31, 2014, the overall allowance for credit 
losses coverage rate was 1.9 percent, an increase of 70 basis 
points year over year. 
	
The decreases in return on equity from 2013 to 2014 and 2012 
to 2013 were driven by higher average equity balances.
Financial Condition
Balance Sheet
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Cash and cash equivalents
$  1,538
$  1,446
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
8,263
9,739
Equipment under operating leases:
External clients (a)
774
947
Client loans
14,290
14,297
Total client financing assets
23,327
24,982
Commercial financing receivables
8,424
8,541
Intercompany financing receivables (b)(c)
4,611
4,216
Other receivables
368
352
Other assets
577
601
Total assets
$38,845
$40,138 
Intercompany payables (b)
$  3,631
$  5,766
Debt (d)
29,103
27,504
Other liabilities
2,094
3,043
Total liabilities
34,828
36,314
Total equity
4,017
3,825
Total liabilities and equity
$38,845
$40,138 
(a)	Includes intercompany markup, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products pur-
chased from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s 
consolidated results. 
(b)	Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore 
does not appear on page 82.
(c)	These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the 
value in the table using Global Financing debt. ­
(d)	Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt. A por-
tion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business, or 
related to intercompany markup embedded in the Global Financing assets. 


===== PAGE 76 =====
75
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Sources and Uses of Funds 
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client 
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end 
users consist of IBM systems, software and services, and OEM 
equipment, software and services to meet IBM clients’ total solu-
tions requirements. Client financing assets are primarily sales-type, 
direct financing and operating leases for systems products, as well 
as loans for systems, software and services with terms up to seven 
years. Global Financing’s client loans are primarily for software and 
services, and are unsecured. These loans are subjected to credit 
analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, when deemed nec-
essary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in the loan agreements 
which include covenants to protect against credit deterioration 
during the life of the obligation. 
	
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory 
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of 
IBM and OEM products. Payment terms for inventory financing 
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 
days. These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and 
are also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate 
the associated risk.
	
In addition to the actions previously described, in certain cir-
cumstances, the company may take mitigation actions to transfer 
credit risk to third parties.
	
At December 31, 2014, substantially all financing assets were IT 
related assets, and approximately 59 percent of the total external 
portfolio was with investment grade clients with no direct exposure 
to consumers. 
Originations 
The following are total financing originations:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
Client financing
$15,099
$15,792
$16,277
Commercial financing
43,664
41,027
36,944
Total
$58,762
$56,819 
$53,222 
In 2014, cash collection of commercial financing and client financ-
ing assets exceeded new financing originations. This resulted in 
a net decline in total financing assets from December 2013. The 
increase in originations in 2014 versus 2013, and in 2013 versus 
2012, was due to improving volumes in commercial financing. Inter-
nal loan financing with Global Services is executed under a loan 
facility and is not considered originations.
	
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2014 was deployed 
to pay intercompany payables and dividends to IBM as well as 
business partners and OEM suppliers. Intercompany payables 
declined in 2014 due to lower IBM volumes and shorter settle-
ment terms, which are in line with external suppliers.
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
The following table presents external financing receivables exclud-
ing residual values, and the allowance for credit losses:
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Gross financing receivables
$31,007
$32,319 
Specific allowance for credit losses
484
279
Unallocated allowance for credit losses
96
113
Total allowance for credit losses
580
392
Net financing receivables
$30,427
$31,928 
Allowance for credit losses coverage
1.9%
1.2%
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables 
Allowance for Credit Losses
($ in millions)
January 1, 2014
Allowance 
Used*
Additions/ 
(Reductions)
Other**
December 31, 
2014
$392
$(26 )
$240 
$(25 )
$580 
  * Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were written off during 
the period. 
** Primarily represents translation adjustments. 
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved was 
1.9 percent at December 31, 2014, and 1.2 percent at Decem-
ber 31, 2013. Specific reserves increased 74 percent from $279 
million at December 31, 2013, to $484 million at December 31, 
2014. Unallocated reserves decreased 15 percent from $113 mil-
lion at December 31, 2013, to $96 million at December 31, 2014, 
primarily due to the decrease in gross financing receivables and 
a shift in gross financing receivables reserves from general to 
specific coverage.
	
Global Financing’s bad debt expense was an increase of $240 
million for 2014, compared to an increase of $85 million for 2013. 
The year-to-year increase in bad debt expense was due to higher 
specific reserve requirements, primarily in China and Latin Amer-
ica, in the current year.
Residual Value 
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and 
management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accu-
rately project future equipment values at lease inception. Global 
Financing has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM 
products under lease. Based upon this product information, Global 
Financing continually monitors projections of future equipment 
values and compares them with the residual values reflected in 
the portfolio. 


===== PAGE 77 =====
76
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by 
selling assets sourced from lease returns, leasing used equip-
ment to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current 
clients. Sales of equipment include equipment returned off of a 
lease, surplus internal equipment, or used equipment purchased 
externally. These sales represented 56.9 percent and 55.8 per-
cent of Global Financing’s revenue in 2014 and 2013, respectively. 
The gross profit margins on these sales were 64.9 percent and 
58.3 percent in 2014 and 2013, respectively. The increase in the 
gross profit margin was driven by a margin increase in internal 
equipment sales and a shift in mix toward higher margin internal 
equipment sales. 
	
The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed 
residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating leases 
at December 31, 2014 and 2013. In addition, the table presents 
the residual value as a percentage of the related original amount 
financed and a run out of when the unguaranteed residual value 
assigned to equipment on leases at December 31, 2014 is expected 
to be returned to the company. In addition to the unguaranteed 
residual value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain guar-
antees of the future value of the equipment to be returned at end 
of lease. While primarily focused on IBM products, guarantees are 
also obtained for certain OEM products. These third-party guar-
antees are included in minimum lease payments as provided for by 
accounting standards in the determination of lease classifications 
for the covered equipment and provide protection against risk of 
loss arising from declines in equipment values for these assets. 
	
The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease 
payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a 
lease as a sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating 
lease. The aggregate asset values associated with the guaran-
tees of sales-type leases were $503 million and $479 million for 
the financing transactions originated during the years ended 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In 2014, the residual 
value guarantee program resulted in the company recognizing 
approximately $378 million of revenue that would otherwise have 
recognized in future periods as operating lease revenue. If the 
company had chosen to not participate in a residual value guar-
antee program in 2014 and prior years, the 2014 impact would be 
substantially mitigated by the effect of prior year asset values being 
recognized as operating lease revenue in the current year. The 
aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees of direct 
financing leases were $204 million and $218 million for the financ-
ing transactions originated during the years ended December 31, 
2014 and 2013, respectively. The associated aggregate guaranteed 
future values at the scheduled end of lease were $25 million and 
$29 million for the financing transactions originated during the 
years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The cost 
of guarantees was $2 million and $3 million for the years ended 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total
Estimated Run Out of 2014 Balance
At December 31:
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018 and 
Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases
$     736
$     671
$122
$187
$224
$138
Operating leases
200
166
56
55
40
15
Total unguaranteed residual value
$     936
$     837
$178
$242
$264
$153
Related original amount financed
$17,642 
$15,636
Percentage
5.3%
5.4%
Debt
At December 31:
2014
2013
Debt-to-equity ratio
7.2x
7.2x
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using a 
debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt used to 
fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercompany loans 
and external debt. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by 
the company to substantially match the term and currency underly-
ing the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing.
	
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract 
by other IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures 
Global Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest 
expense relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external 
client and internal business is included in the “Global Financing 
Results of Operations” on page 73 and in note T, “Segment Infor-
mation,” on pages 145 to 150.
	
In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings, the 
external debt-related interest expense supporting Global Financ-
ing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified from cost of 
financing to interest expense.
	
The following table provides additional information on total 
company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes inter-
nal loans and leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global 
Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. The com-
pany believes these assets should be appropriately leveraged in 
line with the overall Global Financing business model.


===== PAGE 78 =====
77
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
December 31, 2014
December 31, 2013
Global Financing Segment
$29,103 
$27,504 
Debt to support external clients
$25,531 
$24,471 
Debt to support internal clients
3,572
3,033
Non-Global Financing Segments
11,701
12,214
Debt supporting operations
15,274
15,247
Intercompany activity
(3,572)
(3,033)
Total company debt
$40,804 
$39,718 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Global Financing is a segment of the company, and therefore is 
supported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access 
to capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was 
deployed to pay dividends to the company in order to maintain an 
appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. 
Return on Equity
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Numerator
Global Financing after-tax income (a)*
$1,462
$1,456
Denominator
Average Global Financing equity (b)**
$3,973
$3,585
Global Financing return on equity (a) /(b)
36.8%
40.6%
  * Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s 
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on a 
consolidated basis. 
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters.
Looking Forward
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and fund-
ing capacity which enables the company to be well positioned 
in the current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new 
financing volumes are IBM and OEM products and services 
financed to the company’s clients and business partners, and sub-
stantially all financing assets are IT related assets which provide 
a stable base of business for future growth. Global Financing’s 
offerings are competitive and available to clients as a result of the 
company’s borrowing cost and access to the capital markets. 
Overall, Global Financing’s originations will be dependent upon 
the demand for IT products and services as well as client partici-
pation rates.
	
IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper 
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted 
period where IBM could not access the capital markets would 
likely lead to a slowdown in originations. 
	
Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency fluc-
tuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. The 
company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, com-
bined with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate 
gross margin erosion due to changes in interest rates. 
	
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global 
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provi-
sion for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply 
rigorous credit policies in both the origination of new business 
and the evaluation of the existing portfolio. Global Financing has 
historically been able to manage residual value risk both through 
insight into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its 
remarketing business.
	
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the 
key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with 
product and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent man-
agement of the business going forward, even during periods of 
uncertainty with respect to the global economy.


===== PAGE 79 =====
78
Report of Management 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility  
for Financial Information
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial 
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM man-
agement. The accompanying financial statements have been 
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain esti-
mates and judgments as required. 
	
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, 
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines 
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive 
systems and control procedures. An important element of the con-
trol environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system 
also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken 
to correct deficiencies as they are identified.
	
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we 
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate 
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate commu-
nication channels and foster an environment conducive to the 
effective functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for 
the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance with 
the highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business 
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into numerous 
languages, are distributed to employees throughout the world, 
and reemphasized through internal programs to assure that they 
are understood and followed. 
	
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed 
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is respon-
sible for recommending to the Board the independent registered 
public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject 
to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically 
and privately with the independent registered public accounting 
firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM man-
agement, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure 
and financial reporting matters. 
Management’s Report on Internal Control  
Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining 
adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company. 
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to 
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for exter-
nal purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America.
	
The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes 
those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance 
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect 
the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; 
(ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded 
as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in 
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the 
United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the 
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations 
of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide 
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection 
of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s 
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial 
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, pro-
jections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are 
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because 
of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the 
policies or procedures may deteriorate.
	
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of 
internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria estab-
lished in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued 
by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation, management con-
cluded that the company’s internal control over financial reporting 
was effective as of December 31, 2014.
	
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered 
public accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated 
Financial Statements and the effectiveness of the internal con-
trol over financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on 
audits conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public 
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). 
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 24, 2015
Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 24, 2015


===== PAGE 80 =====
79
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of  
Directors of International Business  
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State­
ments appearing on pages 80 through 150 present fairly, in all 
material respects, the financial position of International Busi-
ness Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, 
2014 and 2013 and the results of their operations and their cash 
flows for each of the three years in the period ended Decem-
ber 31, 2014 in conformity with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the 
Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal 
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2014, based 
on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework 
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organ­izations of the 
Treadway Commission (COSO). The Company’s management is 
responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining effec-
tive internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment 
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, 
included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Inter-
nal Control over Financial Reporting appearing on page 78. Our 
responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements 
and on the Company’s internal control over financial report-
ing based on our integrated audits. We conducted our audits in 
accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we 
plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement 
and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was 
maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial state-
ments included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting 
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing 
the accounting principles used and significant estimates made 
by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement 
presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial report-
ing included obtaining an understanding of internal control over 
financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness 
exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effec-
tiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits 
also included performing such other procedures as we considered 
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide 
a reasonable basis for our opinions.
	
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a pro-
cess designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial 
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over 
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) 
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, 
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of 
the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that 
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation 
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the 
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations 
of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide 
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection 
of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s 
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial 
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, pro-
jections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are 
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because 
of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the 
policies or procedures may deteriorate.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
New York, New York
February 24, 2015


===== PAGE 81 =====
80
Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2014
2013*
2012*
Revenue
Services
$55,673
$57,655 
$  59,453 
Sales
35,063
38,666
41,381
Financing
2,057
2,047
2,040
Total revenue
T
92,793
98,367
102,874
Cost
Services
36,034
37,564
39,166
Sales
9,312
11,009
12,260
Financing
1,040
1,110
1,087
Total cost
46,386
49,683
52,513
Gross profit
46,407
48,684
50,361
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative
23,180
23,451
23,463
Research, development and engineering
O
5,437
5,743
5,816
Intellectual property and custom development income
(742)
(822)
(1,074)
Other (income) and expense
(1,938)
(333)
(843)
Interest expense
D&J
484
402
459
Total expense and other (income)
26,421
28,440
27,821
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
19,986
20,244
22,540
Provision for income taxes
N
4,234
3,363
5,541
Income from continuing operations
15,751
16,881
16,999
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
C
(3,729)
(398)
(395)
Net income 
$12,022
$16,483 
$  16,604 
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations
P
$  15.59
$  15.30
$    14.71
Discontinued operations
P
(3.69)
(0.36)
(0.34)
Total 
P
$  11.90
$  14.94 
$    14.37 
Basic
Continuing operations
P
$  15.68
$  15.42
$    14.88
Discontinued operations
P
(3.71)
(0.36)
(0.35)
Total 
P
$  11.97
$  15.06 
$    14.53 
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,010,000,480 1,103,042,156 1,155,449,317
Basic
1,004,272,584 1,094,486,604 1,142,508,521
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 82 =====
81
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2014
2013
2012
Net income
$12,022
$16,483
$16,604 
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments
L
(1,636)
(1,335)
(44)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
(29)
(4)
8
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
5
(8)
(42)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
0
4
20
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
(24)
(8)
(14)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
958
43
32
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
(97)
(166)
(253)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
861
(123)
(220)
Retirement-related benefit plans
L
Prior service costs/(credits)
1
16
—
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(9,799)
5,369
(7,489)
Curtailments and settlements
24
(3)
(2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
(114)
(114)
(148)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,531
3,499
2,457
Total retirement-related benefit plans
(7,357)
8,767
(5,182)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
L
(8,156)
7,301
(5,460)
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income
L
1,883
(3,144)
1,587
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
L
(6,274)
4,157
(3,874)
Total comprehensive income
$  5,748
$20,641
$12,731 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 83 =====
82
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31:
Notes
2014
2013
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$     8,476
$   10,716
Marketable securities
D
0
350
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $336 in 2014 and $291 in 2013)
9,090
10,465
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $452 in 2014 and $308 in 2013)
F
19,835
19,787
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $40 in 2014 and $36 in 2013)
2,906
1,584
Inventories
E
2,103
2,310
Deferred taxes
N
2,044
1,651
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
4,967
4,488
Total current assets
49,422
51,350
Property, plant and equipment
G
39,034
40,475
Less: Accumulated depreciation
G
28,263
26,654
Property, plant and equipment—net
G
10,771
13,821
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $126 in 2014 and $80 in 2013)
F
11,109
12,755
Prepaid pension assets
S
2,160
5,551
Deferred taxes
N
4,808
3,051
Goodwill
I
30,556
31,184
Intangible assets—net
I
3,104
3,871
Investments and sundry assets
H
5,603
4,639
Total assets
$ 117,532 
$ 126,223 
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes
N
$     5,084
$     4,633
Short-term debt
D&J
5,731
6,862
Accounts payable
6,864
7,461
Compensation and benefits
4,031
3,893
Deferred income
11,877
12,557
Other accrued expenses and liabilities
6,013
4,748
Total current liabilities
39,600
40,154
Long-term debt
D&J
35,073
32,856
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations
S
18,261
16,242
Deferred income
3,691
4,108
Other liabilities
K
8,892
9,934
Total liabilities
105,518
103,294
Contingencies and commitments
M
Equity
L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital
52,666
51,594
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2014—2,215,209,574; 2013—2,207,522,548)
Retained earnings
137,793
130,042
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2014—1,224,685,815; 2013—1,153,131,611)
(150,715)
(137,242)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(27,875)
(21,602)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity
11,868
22,792
Noncontrolling interests
A
146
137
Total equity
12,014
22,929
Total liabilities and equity
$ 117,532 
$ 126,223 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 84 =====
83
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income 
$ 12,022
$ 16,483
$ 16,604
Adjustments to reconcile net income  
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation
3,145
3,327
3,392
Amortization of intangibles
1,347
1,351
1,284
Stock-based compensation
512
614
688
Deferred taxes
(237)
(1,610)
797
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other
(1,535)
(236)
(729)
Loss on microelectronics business disposal
3,381
—
—
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables)
1,270
(1,407)
(2,230)
Retirement related
(655)
294
(1,008)
Inventories
(39)
(57)
280
Other assets/other liabilities
(1,886)
(747)
733
Accounts payable
(456)
(529)
(224)
Net cash provided by operating activities
16,868
17,485
19,586
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment
(3,740)
(3,623)
(4,082)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment
404
372
410
Investment in software
(443)
(517)
(635)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments
(2,338)
(4,608)
(4,109)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments
2,493
4,873
3,142
Non-operating finance receivables—net
(1,078)
(1,063)
(608)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired
(656)
(3,056)
(3,722)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred
2,357
297
599
Net cash used in investing activities
(3,001)
(7,326)
(9,004)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt
8,180
16,353
12,242
Payments to settle debt
(4,644)
(10,013)
(9,549)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net
(1,753)
621
(441)
Common stock repurchases
(13,679)
(13,859)
(11,995)
Common stock transactions—other
709
1,074
1,540
Cash dividends paid
(4,265)
(4,058)
(3,773)
Net cash used in financing activities
(15,452)
(9,883)
(11,976)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(655)
28
(116)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
(2,240)
304
(1,511)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
10,716
10,412
11,922
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$   8,476
$ 10,716
$ 10,412
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received
$   5,748
$   4,024
$   3,169
Interest paid on debt
$   1,061
$      982
$   1,009
Capital lease obligations
$          2
$        14
$        10
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 85 =====
84
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2012
Equity, January 1, 2012
$48,129
$104,857
$(110,963)
$(21,885)
$ 20,138 
$  97
$ 20,236
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
16,604
16,604
16,604
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(3,874)
(3,874)
(3,874)
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 12,731
$ 12,731
Cash dividends paid—common stock
(3,773)
(3,773)
(3,773)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (15,091,320 shares)
1,532
1,532
1,532
Purchases (2,406,007 shares) and  
sales (2,746,169 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(48)
(160)
(208)
(208)
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (61,246,371 shares)
(12,008)
(12,008)
(12,008)
Changes in other equity
448
448
448
Changes in noncontrolling interests
27
27
Equity, December 31, 2012
$50,110
$117,641
$(123,131)
$(25,759)
$ 18,860
$124
$ 18,984
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2013
Equity, January 1, 2013
$50,110
$117,641
$(123,131)
$(25,759)
$ 18,860 
$124
$ 18,984
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
16,483
16,483
16,483
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
4,157
4,157
4,157
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 20,641
$ 20,641
Cash dividends paid—common stock
(4,058)
(4,058)
(4,058)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (9,961,389 shares)
1,216
1,216
1,216
Purchases (1,666,069 shares) and  
sales (1,849,883 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(25)
(117)
(142)
(142)
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (73,121,942 shares)
(13,993)
(13,993)
(13,993)
Changes in other equity
268
268
268
Changes in noncontrolling interests
13
13
Equity, December 31, 2013
$51,594
$130,042
$(137,242)
$(21,602)
$ 22,792
$137
$ 22,929
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 86 =====
85
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2014
Equity, January 1, 2014
$51,594
$130,042
$(137,242)
$(21,602)
$ 22,792 
$137
$ 22,929
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
12,022
12,022
12,022
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(6,274)
(6,274)
(6,274)
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$   5,748
$   5,748
Cash dividends paid—common stock
(4,265)
(4,265)
(4,265)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (7,687,026 shares)
977
977
977
Purchases (1,313,569 shares) and  
sales (1,264,232 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(6)
(79)
(85)
(85)
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (71,504,867 shares)
(13,395)
(13,395)
(13,395)
Changes in other equity
95
95
95
Changes in noncontrolling interests
8
8
Equity, December 31, 2014
$52,666
$137,793
$(150,715)
$(27,875)
$ 11,868
$146
$ 12,014
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
86
NOTE A. 
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and 
footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation 
(IBM or the company) have been prepared in accordance with 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of 
America (GAAP).
	
Within the financial statements and tables presented, cer-
tain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded 
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are cal-
culated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior 
year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year 
presentation. This is annotated where applicable.
	
On October 20, 2014, the company announced a definitive 
agreement to divest its Microelectronics business and manufactur-
ing operations to GLOBALFOUNDRIES. The assets and liabilities 
of the Microelectronics business are reported as held for sale at 
December 31, 2014. The operating results of the Microelectronics 
business have been reported as discontinued operations. Prior 
periods have been reclassified to conform to this presentation to 
allow for a meaningful comparison of continuing operations. Refer 
to note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” for additional information on 
the transaction.
	
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $6 million, $7 million and $11 
million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 
2012, respectively, are included in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item. 
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of 
IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority 
owned. Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary 
is reported in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrol-
ling interest is reported as described above in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. The accounts of variable interest entities 
(VIEs) are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if 
required. Investments in business entities in which the company 
does not have control, but has the ability to exercise significant 
influence over operating and financial policies, are accounted for 
using the equity method and the company’s proportionate share 
of income or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. The 
accounting policy for other investments in equity securities is on 
page 95 within “Marketable Securities.” Equity investments in non-
publicly traded entities are primarily accounted for using the cost 
method. All intercompany transactions and accounts have been 
eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP 
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that 
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses 
and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are reported 
in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying 
disclosures. These estimates are based on management’s best 
knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that 
the company may undertake in the future and on various other 
assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circum-
stances. As a result, actual results may be different from these 
estimates. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” on pages 68 to 71 
for a discussion of the company’s critical accounting estimates.
Revenue
The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable 
and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable 
and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement, 
delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and 
collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until 
products have been shipped or services have been provided to 
the client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client 
acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have 
lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria 
specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied. 
The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until 
all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved.
	
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution pro-
viders, resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) 
when the reseller has: economic substance apart from the com-
pany, credit risk, title and risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee to 
the company is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end 
user, the company has no further obligations related to bringing 
about resale or delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria 
have been met.
	
The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns, 
stock rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allow-
ances. (See Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and 
Reserves” included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 
10-K). Revenue is recognized only if these estimates can be rea-
sonably and reliably determined. The company bases its estimates 
on historical results taking into consideration the type of client, 
the type of transaction and the specifics of each arrangement. 
Payments made under cooperative marketing programs are rec-
ognized as an expense only if the company receives from the client 
an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale 
whose fair value can be reasonably and reliably estimated. If the 
company does not receive an identifiable benefit sufficiently sepa-
rable from the product sale whose fair value can be reasonably 
estimated, such payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue.
	
Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services 
is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent 
between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company 


===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
87
is a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered 
to determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most 
notably whether the company is the primary obligor to the client, or 
has inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the com-
pany adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service, 
was involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, 
has latitude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk.
	
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based 
taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on 
and concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In 
addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following are 
the specific revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable 
arrangements and for each major category of revenue.
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may con-
sist of multiple deliverables of its products and services based 
on the needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any 
combination of services, software, hardware and/or financing. For 
example, a client may purchase a server that includes operating 
system software. In addition, the arrangement may include post-
contract support for the software and a contract for post-warranty 
maintenance service for the hardware. These types of arrange-
ments can also include financing provided by the company. These 
arrangements consist of multiple deliverables, with the hardware 
and software delivered in one reporting period and the software 
support and hardware maintenance services delivered across 
multiple reporting periods. In another example, a client may out-
source the running of its datacenter operations to the company on 
a long-term, multiple-year basis and periodically purchase servers 
and/or software products from the company to upgrade or expand 
its facility. The outsourcing services are provided on a continuous 
basis across multiple reporting periods and the hardware and soft-
ware products are delivered in one reporting period. To the extent 
that a deliverable in a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject 
to specific accounting guidance that deliverable is accounted for 
in accordance with such specific guidance. Examples of such 
arrangements may include leased hardware which is subject to 
specific leasing guidance or software which is subject to specific 
software revenue recognition guidance on whether and/or how to 
separate multiple-deliverable arrangements into separate units of 
accounting (separability) and how to allocate the arrangement con-
sideration among those separate units of accounting (allocation). 
For all other deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, 
the guidance below is applied for separability and allocation. A 
multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into more than one 
unit of accounting if the following criteria are met:
•	 The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone 
basis; and 
•	 If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative 
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the  
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially 
in the control of the company. 
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as 
one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being rec-
ognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the 
earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered 
element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element 
and there is a relative selling price for all units of accounting in an 
arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the 
separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative selling 
price. The following revenue policies are then applied to each unit 
of accounting, as applicable.
	
Revenue from the company’s business analytics, mobile, 
security, social and cloud offerings follow the specific revenue 
recognition policies for multiple deliverable arrangements and for 
each major category of revenue depending on the type of offering 
which can be comprised of services, hardware and/or software. 
Services
The company’s primary services offerings include information 
technology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourc-
ing, application management services, consulting and systems 
integration, technology infrastructure and system maintenance, 
hosting and the design and development of complex IT systems 
to a client’s specifications (design and build). These services are 
provided on a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or 
as a fixed-price per measure of output contract and the contract 
terms range from less than one year to over 10 years.
	
Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing 
contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided 
using either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line 
basis over the term of the contract. Under the output method, the 
amount of revenue recognized is based on the services delivered 
in the period.
	
Revenue from application management services, technology 
infrastructure and system maintenance and hosting contracts is 
recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts. 
Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor 
hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue 
related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts 
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
	
Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recog-
nized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under 
the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs 
incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs 
to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original 
estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward comple-
tion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may 
result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs, 
and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which 
the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known 
by the company.


===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
88
	
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its 
services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order 
to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and 
profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that 
the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the 
remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC 
method services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
	
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to 
recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income 
of $6,352 million and $7,153 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. In other services contracts, the company performs the 
services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable of 
$1,833 million and $2,053 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in 
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
	
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs 
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. 
Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months. 
Hardware
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of 
system servers, storage solutions and the sale of semiconductors. 
The company also offers installation services for its more complex 
hardware products.
	
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is rec-
ognized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there 
are no unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final 
acceptance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties 
and remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunc-
tory are accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. 
Revenue from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a 
straight-line basis over the term of the rental or lease.
Software
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is 
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue rec-
ognition criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring 
license charge) license software is recognized on a straight-line 
basis over the period that the client is entitled to use the license. 
Revenue from post-contract support, which may include unspeci-
fied upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized on a 
straight-line basis over the period such items are delivered. Reve-
nue from software hosting or software-as-a-service arrangements 
is recognized as the service is delivered, generally on a straight-
line basis, over the longer of the term of the arrangement or the 
expected period of the customer relationship. In software hosting 
arrangements, the rights provided to the customer (e.g., ownership 
of a license, contract termination provisions and the feasibility of 
the customer to operate the software) are considered in determin-
ing whether the arrangement includes a license. In arrangements 
which include a software license, the associated revenue is rec-
ognized according to whether the license is perpetual or term, 
subject to the guidance above. 
	
In multiple-deliverable arrangements that include software 
that is more than incidental to the products or services as a 
whole (software multiple-deliverable arrangements), software 
and software-related elements are accounted for in accordance 
with software revenue recognition guidance. Software-related 
elements include software products and services for which a soft-
ware deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tangible products 
containing software components and non-software components 
that function together to deliver the tangible product’s essential 
functionality are not within the scope of software revenue recogni-
tion guidance and are accounted for based on other applicable 
revenue recognition guidance.
	
A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated 
into more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria 
are met:
•	 The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent 
on the undelivered element(s);
•	 There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair 
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is based 
on the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately 
by the company on a regular basis and not as part of the mul-
tiple-deliverable arrangement; and 
•	 Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmination 
of the earnings process for that element(s).
If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is accounted 
for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being 
recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until 
the earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undeliv-
ered element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element 
and there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an 
arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the 
separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE 
of fair value. There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE 
of fair value of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for 
the delivered item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used 
to allocate the arrangement consideration. Under the residual 
method, the amount of consideration allocated to the delivered 
item(s) equals the total arrangement consideration less the aggre-
gate VSOE of fair value of the undelivered elements.
	
The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have 
a stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing 
software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these 
multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software 
deliverable and the non-software deliverables based on the rela-
tive selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using 
the hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of 
selling price (BESP). In the limited circumstances where the com-
pany cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of 
the deliverables in the arrangement, including the software deliver-
able, BESP is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.


===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
89
Financing
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financ-
ing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the 
effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized 
on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Best Estimate of Selling Price
In certain limited instances, the company is not able to establish 
VSOE for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When 
VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to establish 
the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is deter-
mined based on competitor prices for similar deliverables when 
sold separately.
	
When the company is unable to establish selling price using 
VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrange-
ment consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the 
price at which the company would transact a sale if the product or 
service were sold on a stand-alone basis. Due to the fact that the 
company sells its products and services on a stand-alone basis, 
and therefore has established VSOE for its products and services 
offerings, the company uses BESP to determine the relative selling 
price for a product or service in a multiple-deliverable arrangement 
on an infrequent basis. An example of when BESP would be used 
is when the company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE 
does not yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to 
selling the new product on a stand-alone basis.
	
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors 
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including 
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, 
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing 
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that 
includes review and approval by the company’s management. 
In addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its 
products and services, in addition to BESP.
Services Costs
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs 
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred. 
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external 
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method 
are deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred 
to date, as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill 
the contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the 
initial phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subse-
quently amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup 
costs related to the installation of systems and processes and 
are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period 
of benefit, not to exceed the term of the contract. Additionally, 
fixed assets associated with outsourcing contracts are capital-
ized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the expected 
useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, then the 
depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life of the asset 
or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair 
value of acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements are 
deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis as a reduction of 
revenue over the expected period of benefit not to exceed the 
term of the contract. The company performs periodic reviews to 
assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition and setup 
costs. This review is done by comparing the estimated minimum 
remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract to the unamor-
tized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted cash flows 
are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, an impairment 
loss is recognized.
	
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,230 
million and $2,402 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respec-
tively. Amortization of deferred services transition and setup costs 
was estimated at December 31, 2014 to be $738 million in 2015, 
$525 million in 2016, $388 million in 2017, $250 million in 2018 and 
$329 million thereafter.
	
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value 
of acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $64 
million and $89 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respec-
tively. Amortization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess 
of the fair value of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of rev-
enue and was estimated at December 31, 2014 to be $27 million 
in 2015, $15 million in 2016, $7 million in 2017, $6 million in 2018 and 
$8 million thereafter. In situations in which an outsourcing con-
tract is terminated, the terms of the contract may require the client 
to reimburse the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts 
receivable, unamortized deferred costs incurred to purchase 
specific assets utilized in the delivery of services and to pay any 
additional costs incurred by the company to transition the services.
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of 
licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research, 
development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to 
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has 
been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capital-
ized amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods 
ranging up to three years and are recorded in software cost within 
cost of sales. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure 
that unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future 
revenue. Costs to support or service licensed programs are 
charged to software cost within cost of sales as incurred.
	
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to pur-
chase or to create and implement internal-use software programs, 
including software coding, installation, testing and certain data 
conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
line basis over periods ranging up to two years and are recorded 
in selling, general and administrative expense. 


===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
90
Product Warranties
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that 
generally range up to three years, with the majority being either 
one or three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard 
to the deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for 
the related deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs 
standard to the deliverable based on historical warranty claim 
experience and estimates of future spending, and applies this esti-
mate to the revenue stream for products under warranty. Estimated 
future costs for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in the 
current period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is 
reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining 
obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over the bal-
ance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when actual 
warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs from 
fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including extended 
warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred.
	
Revenue from separately priced extended warranty contracts 
is initially recorded as deferred income and subsequently recog-
nized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period. Changes 
in deferred income for extended warranty contracts, and in the 
warranty liability for standard warranties, which are included in 
other accrued expenses and liabilities and other liabilities in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, are presented in the 
following tables:
Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
2014
2013
Balance at January 1
$ 376
$ 394
Current period accruals
240
346
Accrual adjustments to reflect experience*
(120)
22
Charges incurred
(298)
(387)
Balance at December 31
$ 197
$ 376
* Includes an adjustment of ($125 million) in 2014 related to the industry standard server 
divestiture.
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
($ in millions)
2014
2013
Balance at January 1
$ 579
$ 606
Revenue deferred for new extended  
warranty contracts
298
305
Amortization of deferred revenue*
(316)
(324)
Other**
(24)
(8)
Balance at December 31
$ 536
$ 579
Current portion
$ 254
$ 284
Noncurrent portion
282
295
Balance at December 31
$ 536
$ 579
  * Includes an adjustment of $(21 million) in 2014 related to the industry standard server 
divestiture.
** Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred 
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Expense and Other Income
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged 
to income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling prod-
ucts and services are classified as selling expense and include 
such items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and 
travel. General and administrative expense includes such items 
as compensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes, 
insurance and office rental. In addition, general and administrative 
expense includes other operating items such as an allowance for 
credit losses, workforce rebalancing charges for contractually obli-
gated payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course 
of business, acquisition costs related to business combinations, 
amortization of certain intangible assets and environmental reme-
diation costs.
Advertising and Promotional Expense
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as 
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from ven-
dors are recorded net of advertising and promotional expense 
in the period in which the related advertising and promotional 
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, which 
includes media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,307 
million, $1,294 million and $1,339 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, 
respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. 
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are 
expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to pro-
duce the finished product after technological feasibility has been 
established are capitalized as an intangible asset. 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intel-
lectual property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade 
secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to 
third parties are licensing/royalty-based and others are transac-
tion-based sales and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based 
fees involve transfers in which the company earns the income 
over time, or the amount of income is not fixed or determinable 
until the licensee sells future related products (i.e., variable roy-
alty, based upon licensee’s revenue). Sales and other transfers 
typically include transfers of IP whereby the company has fulfilled 
its obligations and the fee received is fixed or determinable at 
the transfer date. The company also enters into cross-licensing 
arrangements of patents, and income from these arrangements 
is recorded when earned. In addition, the company earns income 
from certain custom development projects for strategic technology 


===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
91
partners and specific clients. The company records the income 
from these projects when the fee is realized and earned, is not 
refundable and is not dependent upon the success of the project.
Other (Income) and Expense
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than 
from Global Financing external transactions), gains and losses on 
certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from securities 
and other investments, gains and losses from certain real estate 
transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, gains 
and losses from the sale of businesses, other than reported as 
discontinued operations, and amounts related to accretion of asset 
retirement obligations. 
Business Combinations and  
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the 
acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets 
acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest 
in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. 
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the 
fair value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifi-
able intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate goodwill 
are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and the 
company and the acquired assembled workforce, neither of which 
qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset. Goodwill 
recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable reporting 
units based on expected revenues. Identifiable intangible assets 
with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. Amortization 
of completed technology is recorded in Cost, and amortization of 
all other intangible assets is recorded in SG&A expense. Acquisi-
tion-related costs, including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation 
and other costs, are expensed in the periods in which the costs 
are incurred. The results of operations of acquired businesses 
are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements from the 
acquisition date.
Impairment
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangi-
ble assets, are tested for impairment whenever events or changes 
in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be 
recoverable. The impairment test is based on undiscounted cash 
flows and, if impaired, the asset is written down to fair value based 
on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill and 
indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested annually, in the fourth 
quarter, for impairment and whenever changes in circumstances 
indicate an impairment may exist. Goodwill is tested at the report-
ing unit level which is the operating segment, or a business, which 
is one level below that operating segment (the “component” level) if 
discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by 
management at the segment level. Components are aggregated as 
a single reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics.
Depreciation and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated 
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. 
The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are 
as follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 
20 years; land improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office 
equipment, 2 to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. 
Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of their 
estimated useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding 
25 years.
	
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after techno-
logical feasibility has been established are amortized over periods 
ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software 
are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up 
to 2 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over periods 
between 1 and 7 years. 
Environmental
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are 
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup 
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will 
incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated, 
the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental 
liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental 
liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for 
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associ-
ated with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are 
initially recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs 
are capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related 
assets by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs 
are subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related 
assets. Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records 
period-to-period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the 
passage of time in interest expense and revisions to either the 
timing or the amount of the original expected cash flows to the 
related assets.
Defined Benefit Pension and  
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related 
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference 
between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at 
December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pen-
sion plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation 
(PBO), which represents the actuarial present value of benefits 
expected to be paid upon retirement based on employee services 
already rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For 
the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obliga-
tion is the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), 
which represents the actuarial present value of postretirement 


===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
92
benefits attributed to employee services already rendered. The 
fair value of plan assets represents the current market value of 
assets held in an irrevocable trust fund, held for the sole benefit 
of participants, which are invested by the trust fund. Overfunded 
plans, with the fair value of plan assets exceeding the benefit obli-
gation, are aggregated and recorded as a prepaid pension asset 
equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, with the benefit obliga-
tion exceeding the fair value of plan assets, are aggregated and 
recorded as a retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit 
obligation equal to this excess.
	
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension postre-
tirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value 
of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value 
of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is 
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated State-
ment of Financial Position.
	
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement ben-
efit cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings and includes service cost, interest cost, expected return 
on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and 
(gains)/losses previously recognized as a component of OCI and 
amortization of the net transition asset remaining in accumulated 
other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). Service cost repre-
sents the actuarial present value of participant benefits earned in 
the current year. Interest cost represents the time value of money 
cost associated with the passage of time. Certain events, such as 
changes in the employee base, plan amendments and changes in 
actuarial assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation 
and the corresponding change in OCI. The result of these events 
is amortized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) over 
the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending 
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are 
based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets. Net 
periodic cost/(income) is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in 
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ 
respective functions.
	
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized 
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a com-
ponent of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive 
Income. Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are 
subsequently recognized as a component of net periodic cost/
(income) pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions 
of applicable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result 
of differences between actual experience and assumptions or as 
a result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/ 
(credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior 
service granted in plan amendments.
	
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the 
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the 
plans and use participant-specific information such as compen-
sation, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, 
including estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan 
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates 
and mortality rates.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is 
recorded when the employee renders service to the company. 
The charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consoli-
dated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ respective 
functions.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
based awards granted to employees. The company measures 
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the 
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a 
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee 
requisite service period. The company estimates the fair value of 
stock options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The com-
pany also grants its employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), 
including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Perfor-
mance Share Units (PSUs). RSUs are stock awards granted to 
employees that entitle the holder to shares of common stock as 
the award vests, typically over a one- to five-year period. The fair 
value of the awards is determined and fixed on the grant date 
based on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of 
dividend equivalents. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded 
in Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
ings based on the employees’ respective functions.
	
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that 
result in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based 
on the amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory 
tax rate in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Dif-
ferences between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial 
reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the 
income tax return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the 
tax deduction exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consoli-
dated Statement of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds the 
tax deduction and no additional paid-in capital exists from previ-
ous awards).
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income 
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary 
differences between asset and liability amounts that are recog-
nized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are 
recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are 
measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allow-
ances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount 
that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a 
valuation allowance, management considers all available evidence 
for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of 
future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning 
strategies. When the company changes its determination as to the 
amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation 
allowance is adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax 
expense in the period in which such determination is made.


===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
93
	
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the 
company’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, 
the company believes that certain positions may not be fully sus-
tained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions 
are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 
50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. The current 
portion of tax liabilities is included in taxes and the noncurrent por-
tion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position. To the extent that new informa-
tion becomes available which causes the company to change its 
judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such 
changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the 
period in which such determination is made. Interest and penalties, 
if any, related to accrued liabilities for potential tax assessments 
are included in income tax expense. 
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local 
functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars 
at year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded 
in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-aver-
age rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
	
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other 
non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and 
branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approxi-
mate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the 
assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated 
in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end 
exchange rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in 
other (income) and expense. Income and expense items are trans-
lated at the weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during 
the year. These translation gains and losses are included in net 
income for the period in which exchange rates change.
Derivative Financial Instruments
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid 
expenses and other current assets, investments and sundry 
assets, other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. 
Classification of each derivative as current or noncurrent is based 
upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater 
than 12 months. To qualify for hedge accounting, the company 
requires that the instruments be effective in reducing the risk 
exposure that they are designated to hedge. For instruments that 
hedge cash flows, hedge designation criteria also require that it 
be probable that the underlying transaction will occur. Instruments 
that meet established accounting criteria are formally designated 
as hedges. These criteria demonstrate that the derivative is 
expected to be highly effective at offsetting changes in fair value 
or cash flows of the underlying exposure both at inception of the 
hedging relationship and on an ongoing basis. The method of 
assessing hedge effectiveness and measuring hedge ineffective-
ness is formally documented at hedge inception. The company 
assesses hedge effectiveness and measures hedge ineffective-
ness at least quarterly throughout the designated hedge period.
	
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company 
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a 
recognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized firm 
commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or for-
eign currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of 
a forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received or paid 
related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge 
attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge 
of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign oper-
ation. In addition, the company may enter into derivative contracts 
that economically hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge 
accounting does not apply or the company elects not to apply 
hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists a natural hedging 
relationship in which changes in the fair value of the derivative, 
which are recognized currently in net income, act as an economic 
offset to changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item(s).
	
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a 
fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of 
the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each 
period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments 
are recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of 
financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges 
of currency risk associated with recorded financial assets or lia-
bilities, derivative fair value adjustments are recognized in other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a 
cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in OCI, in 
the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income. When net 
income is affected by the variability of the underlying cash flow, the 
applicable offsetting amount of the gain or loss from the derivative 
that is deferred in AOCI is released to net income and reported 
in interest expense, Cost, SG&A expense or other (income) and 
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the 
nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net 
investment hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot 
basis. The effective portion of changes in the fair value of net 
investment hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial 
instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded 
as foreign currency translation adjustments in OCI. Changes in 
the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging derivative 
excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded in inter-
est expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge 
ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are 
included in net income each period until the instrument matures. 
When the derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or 
liability is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except as 
required under other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives 
that are not designated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair 
value of derivatives that do not effectively offset changes in the fair 
value of the underlying hedged item throughout the designated 
hedge period (collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net 
income for each period and are primarily reported in other (income) 


===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
94
and expense. When a cash flow hedging relationship is discon-
tinued, the net gain or loss in AOCI must generally remain in AOCI 
until the item that was hedged affects earnings. However, when 
it is probable that a forecasted transaction will not occur by the 
end of the originally specified time period or within an additional 
two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss in AOCI must be 
reclassified into earnings immediately. The company reports cash 
flows arising from derivative financial instruments designated as 
fair value or cash flow hedges consistent with the classification of 
cash flows from the underlying hedged items that these deriva-
tives are hedging. Accordingly, the cash flows associated with 
derivatives designated as fair value or cash flow hedges are clas-
sified in cash flows from operating activities in the Consolidated 
Statement of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated 
as net investment hedges and derivatives that do not qualify as 
hedges are reported in cash flows from investing activities in the 
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. For currency swaps des-
ignated as hedges of foreign currency denominated debt (included 
in the company’s debt risk management program as addressed in 
note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 105 through 109), cash 
flows directly associated with the settlement of the principal ele-
ment of these swaps are reported in payments to settle debt in 
cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Cash Flows.
Financial Instruments
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the com-
pany uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based 
on market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet 
date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 104 to 105 
for further information. All methods of assessing fair value result 
in a general approximation of value, and such value may never 
actually be realized.
Fair Value Measurement 
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be 
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly 
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. 
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain 
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy:
•	 Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets  
for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the 
measurement date;
•	 Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within 
Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either 
directly or indirectly; and
•	 Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such 
data is available without undue cost and effort.
	
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market 
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies 
such items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not avail-
able, fair value is based upon internally developed models that use 
current market-based or independently sourced market param-
eters such as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using 
internally generated models are classified according to the lowest 
level input or value driver that is significant to the valuation.
	
The determination of fair value considers various factors includ-
ing interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial 
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses 
a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensu-
rate with the duration of the instrument.
	
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the com-
pany considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base 
valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below 
for several parameters that market participants would consider in 
determining fair value:
•	 Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial 
instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a 
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market 
to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
•	 Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s 
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair 
value. The methodology is consistent with that applied in 
developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but incor-
porates the company’s own credit risk as observed in the 
credit default swap market.
As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a 
discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs 
such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and 
forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs 
relate to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets which 
are available for the full term of the derivative.
	
Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a non-
recurring basis. These assets include equity method investments 
that are recognized at fair value at the measurement date to the 
extent that they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. 
Certain assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis 
can be subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These 
assets include available-for-sale equity investments that are 
deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an 
other-than-temporary impairment of a financial instrument, fair 
value is measured using a model described above.
	
Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible 
financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair 
value, on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not 
permitted to be accounted for at fair value under other account-
ing standards. This election is irrevocable. The company has not 
applied the fair value option to any eligible assets or liabilities.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or 
less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.


===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
95
Marketable Securities
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that 
are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance 
sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be 
realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are 
included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable 
equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported 
at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable 
taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and losses for available-for-sale 
securities are included in other (income) and expense in the Con-
solidated Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and losses are 
calculated based on the specific identification method.
	
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in 
market value has occurred, the company considers the duration 
that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below 
its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the 
issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the company’s 
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an antici-
pated recovery in fair value. Other-than-temporary declines in fair 
value from amortized cost for available-for-sale equity and debt 
securities that the company intends to sell or would more likely 
than not be required to sell before the expected recovery of the 
amortized cost basis are charged to other (income) and expense 
in the period in which the loss occurs. For debt securities that the 
company has no intent to sell and believes that it more likely than 
not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, only the credit loss 
component of the impairment is recognized in other (income) and 
expense, while the remaining loss is recognized in OCI. The credit 
loss component recognized in other (income) and expense is iden-
tified as the amount of the principal cash flows not expected to be 
received over the remaining term of the debt security as projected 
using the company’s cash flow projections. 
Inventories
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at 
the lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the sale 
of inventories are reflected in net cash provided by operating activi-
ties in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. 
Allowance for Credit Losses
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of 
a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable 
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receiv-
ables is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated 
based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and 
any specific, known troubled accounts.
Financing Receivables
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing 
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with 
lease accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets 
recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The 
company determines its allowances for credit losses on financing 
receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables 
and loan receivables. The company further segments the portfolio 
into two classes: major markets and growth markets.
	
When calculating the allowances, the company considers its 
ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equip-
ment and by considering the current fair market value of any other 
collateral. The value of the equipment is the net realizable value. 
The allowance for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales 
and customer loans includes an assessment of the entire balance 
of the capital lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The 
methodologies that the company uses to calculate its receivables 
reserves, which are applied consistently to its different portfolios, 
are as follows:
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing receiv-
ables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily 
consists of an analysis based upon current information available 
about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, pub-
lished credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as well 
as the current economic environment, collateral net of reposses-
sion cost and prior collection history. For loans that are collateral 
dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the col-
lateral when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the 
company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable 
and calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the probabil-
ity of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the 
company records a specific reserve. 
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated 
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its differ-
ent portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically 
reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probabil-
ity of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history. 
Factors that could result in actual receivable losses that are materi-
ally different from the estimated reserve include sharp changes in 
the economy, or a significant change in the economic health of a 
particular client that represents a concentration in the company’s 
receivables portfolio. 
Other Credit-Related Policies
Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has 
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual 
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired 
loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other 
accounts for which it is likely that the company will be unable to 
collect all amounts due according to original terms of the lease 
or loan agreement. Income recognition is discontinued on these 
receivables. Cash collections are first applied as a reduction to 
principal outstanding. Any cash received in excess of principal 
payments outstanding is recognized as interest income. Receiv-
ables may be removed from non-accrual status, if appropriate, 
based upon changes in client circumstances.


===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
96
Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance 
when management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable 
is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the 
allowance.
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when 
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the 
original billing date.
Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all 
financing receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for 
impairment on a quarterly basis. The company considers any 
loan with an individually evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. 
Depending on the level of impairment, loans will also be placed 
on non-accrual status as appropriate. Client loans are primarily 
for software and services and are unsecured. These loans are 
subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, 
when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in the 
loan agreements which include covenants to protect against credit 
deterioration during the life of the obligation.
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at 
the inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the 
assets at the end of the lease term. The company periodically 
reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual values. Any 
anticipated increases in specific future residual values are not rec-
ognized before realization through remarketing efforts. Anticipated 
decreases in specific future residual values that are considered to 
be other-than-temporary are recognized immediately upon iden-
tification and are recorded as an adjustment to the residual value 
estimate. For sales-type and direct-financing leases, this reduction 
lowers the recorded net investment and is recognized as a loss 
charged to financing income in the period in which the estimate is 
changed, as well as an adjustment to unearned income to reduce 
future-period financing income.
Common Stock
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock 
as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Trea-
sury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury 
stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a 
weighted-average basis. 
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method. 
The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common 
stock and participating securities according to dividends and 
dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights 
in undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is com-
puted by dividing net income by the weighted-average number 
of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of 
common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-average 
number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive 
potential common shares outstanding during the period using the 
treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include 
outstanding stock options, stock awards and convertible notes. 
NOTE B.  
ACCOUNTING CHANGES
New Standards to be Implemented
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) 
issued guidance on the recognition of revenue from contracts with 
customers. Revenue recognition will depict the transfer of prom-
ised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects 
the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in 
exchange for those goods or services. The guidance also requires 
disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty 
of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. 
The guidance permits two methods of adoption: retrospectively to 
each prior reporting period presented, or retrospectively with the 
cumulative effect of initially applying the guidance recognized at 
the date of initial application. The guidance is effective January 1, 
2017 and early adoption is not permitted. The company is cur-
rently evaluating the impact of the new guidance and the method 
of adoption.
	
In April 2014, the FASB issued guidance that changed the cri-
teria for reporting a discontinued operation. Only disposals of a 
component that represents a strategic shift that has (or will have) 
a major effect on an entity’s operations and financial results is a 
discontinued operation. The guidance also requires expanded 
disclosures about discontinued operations and disposals of a 
significant part of an entity that does not qualify for discontin-
ued operations reporting. The guidance is effective January 1, 
2015 with early adoption permitted, but only for disposals (or 
classifications as held for sale) that have not been reported in 
previously-issued financial statements. The company will adopt 
the new guidance on January 1, 2015. The impact to the company 
will be dependent on any potential transaction that is within the 
scope of the new guidance.
Standards Implemented
In July 2013, the FASB issued guidance regarding the presentation 
of an unrecognized tax benefit when a net operating loss carryfor-
ward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward exists. Under 
certain circumstances, unrecognized tax benefits should be pre-
sented in the financial statements as a reduction to a deferred tax 
asset for a net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss, or 
a tax credit carryforward. The guidance was effective January 1, 
2014. The guidance was a change in financial statement presen-
tation only and did not have a material impact in the consolidated 
financial results. 


===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
97
	
In March 2013, the FASB issued guidance on when foreign cur-
rency translation adjustments should be released to net income. 
When a parent entity ceases to have a controlling financial interest 
in a subsidiary or group of assets that is a business within a for-
eign entity, the parent is required to release any related cumulative 
translation adjustment into net income. Accordingly, the cumula-
tive translation adjustment should be released into net income 
only if the sale or transfer results in the complete or substantially 
complete liquidation of the foreign entity in which the subsidiary 
or group of assets had resided. The guidance was effective Janu-
ary 1, 2014 and did not have a material impact in the consolidated 
financial results. 
	
In February 2013, the FASB issued guidance for the recognition, 
measurement and disclosure of obligations resulting from joint 
and several liability arrangements for which the total amount of the 
obligation within the scope of the guidance is fixed at the report-
ing date. Examples include debt arrangements, other contractual 
obligations and settled litigation matters. The guidance requires 
an entity to measure such obligations as the sum of the amount 
that the reporting entity agreed to pay on the basis of its arrange-
ment among its co-obligors plus additional amounts the reporting 
entity expects to pay on behalf of its co-obligors. The guidance 
was effective January 1, 2014 and did not have a material impact 
in the consolidated financial results.
	
In February 2013, the FASB issued additional guidance regard-
ing reclassifications out of AOCI. The guidance requires entities 
to report the effect of significant reclassifications out of AOCI on 
the respective line items in net income unless the amounts are 
not reclassified in their entirety to net income. For amounts that 
are not required to be reclassified in their entirety to net income 
in the same reporting period, entities are required to cross-refer-
ence other disclosures that provide additional detail about those 
amounts. For the company, the new guidance was effective on a 
prospective basis for all interim and annual periods beginning Jan-
uary 1, 2013 with early adoption permitted. The company adopted 
the guidance in its December 31, 2012 financial statements. There 
was no impact in the consolidated financial results as the guidance 
related only to additional disclosures.
	
In July 2012, the FASB issued amended guidance that simpli-
fies how entities test indefinite-lived intangible assets other than 
goodwill for impairment. After an assessment of certain qualita-
tive factors, if it is determined to be more likely than not that an 
indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, entities must perform 
the quantitative impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test 
is optional. The amended guidance was effective for annual and 
interim impairment tests performed for fiscal years beginning after 
September 15, 2012, with early adoption permitted. The company 
adopted this guidance for its 2012 impairment testing of indefinite-
lived intangible assets performed in the fourth quarter. There was 
no impact in the consolidated financial results.
NOTE C.  
ACQUISITIONS/DIVESTITURES
Acquisitions
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in 
the tables in this note, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions 
are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of 
acquired cash and cash equivalents. 
2014
In 2014, the company completed six acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $608 million.
	
The Software segment completed acquisitions of five privately 
held companies: in the first quarter, Aspera, Inc. (Aspera) and Clou-
dant, Inc. (Cloudant); in the second quarter, Silverpop Systems, Inc. 
(Silverpop) and Cognea Group Pty LTD (Cognea); and in the third 
quarter, CrossIdeas Srl (CrossIdeas). Global Technology Services 
(GTS) completed one acquisition: in the third quarter, Lighthouse 
Security Group, LLC (Lighthouse), a privately held company. 
	
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these 
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of 
December 31, 2014:
2014 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
Total 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$  56
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
39
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
442
Completed technology
5–7
68
Client relationships
7
77
Patents/trademarks
1–7
18 
Total assets acquired
701
Current liabilities
(26)
Noncurrent liabilities
(67)
Total liabilities assumed
(93)
Total purchase price
$608
N/A—Not applicable
Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the 
company’s portfolio of product and services offerings. Aspera’s 
technology helps make cloud computing faster, more predict-
able and more cost effective for big data transfers such as 


===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
98
enterprise storage, sharing virtual images or accessing the cloud 
for increased computing capacity. Cloudant will extend the com-
pany’s mobile and cloud platform by enabling developers to easily 
and quickly create next generation mobile and Web-based appli-
cations. Silverpop is a provider of cloud-based capabilities that 
deliver personalized customer engagements in highly scalable 
environments. Cognea offers personalized artificial intelligence 
capabilities designed to serve as an intuitive interface between 
human users and data-driven information. CrossIdeas delivers 
next-generation identity and access governance capabilities to 
help mitigate access risks and segregation of duty violations. 
Lighthouse is a provider of cloud-enabled managed identity and 
access management solutions.
	
The overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable 
intangible assets acquired is 6.8 years. These identified intan-
gible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their 
useful lives. Goodwill of $442 million has been assigned to the 
Software ($430 million) and Global Technology Services ($11 mil-
lion) segments. It is expected that approximately 1 percent of the 
goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. All acquisitions were 
for 100 percent of the acquired companies.
2013
In 2013, the company completed 10 acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $3,219 million. 
SoftLayer Technologies, Inc. (SoftLayer)—On July 3, 2013, the 
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of the pri-
vately held company, SoftLayer, a cloud computing infrastructure 
provider based in Dallas, Texas, for cash consideration of $1,977 
million. SoftLayer joined the company’s new cloud services unit, 
which combined SoftLayer with IBM SmartCloud into a global plat-
form. Goodwill of $1,285 million has been assigned to the Global 
Technology Services ($1,246 million) and Software ($39 million) 
segments. At the acquisition date, it was expected that none of 
the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall 
weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets 
acquired is 7.0 years. 
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment completed acqui-
sitions of eight privately held companies: in the first quarter, 
StoredIQ Inc. (StoredIQ) and Star Analytics, Inc. (Star Analytics); 
in the second quarter, UrbanCode Inc. (UrbanCode); and in the 
third quarter, Trusteer, Ltd. (Trusteer) and Daeja Image Systems, 
Ltd. (Daeja); and in the fourth quarter, Xtify, Inc. (Xtify), The Now 
Factory and Fiberlink Communications (Fiberlink). Systems and 
Technology (STG) completed one acquisition: in the third quarter, 
CSL International (CSL), a privately held company. All acquisitions 
in 2013 were for 100 percent of the acquired companies.
	
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these 
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of 
December 31, 2013.
2013 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
SoftLayer
Other 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$     80
$     97
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
300
41
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,285
961
Completed technology
5–7
290
181
Client relationships
6–7
245
97
In-process R&D
N/A
2
—
Patents/trademarks
2–7
75
32 
Total assets acquired
2,277
1,408
Current liabilities
(56)
(61)
Noncurrent liabilities
(244)
(105)
Total liabilities assumed
(300)
(166)
Total purchase price
 
$1,977 
$1,242 
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
99
In addition to SoftLayer, each acquisition further complemented 
and enhanced the company’s portfolio of product and services 
offerings. The acquisition of StoredIQ advances the company’s 
efforts to help clients derive value from big data. The combination 
of the company’s and Star Analytics’ software advances the com-
pany’s business analytics initiatives. UrbanCode automates the 
delivery of software, helping businesses quickly release and update 
mobile, social, big data and cloud applications. CSL deepens the 
consolidation cloud capabilities by offering simplified management 
of the virtualization environment. Trusteer extends the company’s 
data security capabilities further into the cloud, mobile and end-
point security space. Daeja delivers software that helps employees 
across all industries, especially data intensive ones such as bank-
ing, insurance and healthcare, get faster access to critical business 
information, and complements the company’s big data capabilities. 
Xtify is a leading provider of cloud-based mobile messaging tools 
that help organizations improve mobile sales, drive in-store traffic 
and engage customers with personalized offers. The Now Fac-
tory is a provider of analytics software that helps communications 
service providers (CSPs) deliver better customer experiences and 
drive new revenue opportunities. Fiberlink is a mobile management 
and security company, that supports the company’s expanding 
vision for enterprise mobility management, which encompasses 
secure transactions between businesses, partners, and customers.
	
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average 
life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is 
6.6 years. These identified intangible assets will be amortized on 
a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $961 million 
has been assigned to the Software ($948 million) and Systems and 
Technology ($13 million) segments. At the acquisition dates, it was 
expected that approximately 2 percent of the goodwill would be 
deductible for tax purposes.
2012
In 2012, the company completed 11 acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $3,964 million. 
Kenexa Corporation (Kenexa)—On December 3, 2012, the com-
pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Kenexa, a 
publicly held company, for cash consideration of $1,351 million. 
Kenexa, a leading provider of recruiting and talent management 
solutions, brings a unique combination of cloud-based technology 
and consulting services that integrates both people and pro-
cesses, providing solutions to engage a smarter, more effective 
workforce across their most critical business functions. Goodwill 
of $1,014 million was assigned to the Software ($771 million) and 
Global Technology Services (GTS) ($243 million) segments. As of 
the acquisition date, it was expected that approximately 10 percent 
of the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. The over-
all weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets 
acquired was 6.5 years. 
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed eight 
other acquisitions: in the first quarter, Green Hat Software Limited 
(Green Hat), Emptoris Inc. (Emptoris) and Worklight, Inc. (Worklight), 
all privately held companies, and DemandTec, Inc. (DemandTec), 
a publicly held company; in the second quarter, Varicent Software 
Inc. (Varicent), Vivisimo Inc. (Vivisimo) and Tealeaf Technology Inc. 
(Tealeaf), all privately held companies; and in the third quarter, 
Butterfly Software, Ltd. (Butterfly), a privately held company. STG 
completed two acquisitions: in the first quarter, Platform Comput-
ing Corporation (Platform Computing), a privately held company; 
and in the third quarter, Texas Memory Systems (TMS), a privately 
held company. All acquisitions in 2012 were for 100 percent of the 
acquired companies.
	
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of Decem-
ber 31, 2012.
2012 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
Kenexa
Other 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$   133
$   278
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
98
217
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,014
1,880
Completed technology
3–7
169
403
Client relationships
4–7
179
194
In-process R&D
N/A
—
11
Patents/trademarks
1–7
39
37 
Total assets acquired
1,632
3,020
Current liabilities
(93)
(143)
Noncurrent liabilities
(188)
(264)
Total liabilities assumed
(281)
(407)
Total purchase price
 
$1,351 
$2,613 
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
100
	
The companies have also agreed to a 10-year exclusive manu-
facturing sourcing agreement in which GLOBALFOUNDRIES will 
provide server processor semiconductor technology for use in 
IBM Systems. The agreement provides the company with capac-
ity and market-based pricing for current semiconductor nodes 
in production and progression to nodes in the future for both 
development and production needs. As part of the transaction 
agreement, the company will provide GLOBALFOUNDRIES with 
certain transition services, including IT, supply chain, packaging 
and test services and lab services. The initial term for these tran-
sition services is one to three years, with GLOBALFOUNDRIES 
having the ability to renew. 
	
The transaction will be completed as soon as is practical, 
subject to the satisfaction of regulatory requirements, customary 
closing conditions and any other required approvals. The transac-
tion is expected to close in 2015. 
	
In the third quarter of 2014, the company recorded a pre-tax 
charge of $4.7 billion related to the expected sale of the Micro-
electronics disposal group, which was part of the Systems and 
Technology reportable segment. The pre-tax charge reflected 
the fair value less the estimated cost of selling the disposal group 
including an impairment to the semiconductor long-lived assets 
of $2.4 billion, $1.5 billion representing the cash consideration 
expected to be transferred to GLOBALFOUNDRIES and $0.8 bil-
lion of other related costs. The asset impairment was reflected 
in property, plant and equipment, net and the other estimated 
costs of disposal were reflected in other accrued expenses and 
liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position at September 30, 2014. These estimates may 
be adjusted, and the company may incur additional charges prior 
to the closing of the transaction. All assets and liabilities of the 
business are reported as held for sale at December 31, 2014. The 
cash consideration is expected to be transferred over three years 
with $750 million transferred at the closing date. The actual net 
cash related to the transaction will be adjusted by the amount of 
the working capital due from GLOBALFOUNDRIES, estimated to 
be $200 million.
	
Reporting the related assets and liabilities initially as held for 
sale at September 30, 2014 was based on meeting all of the criteria 
for such reporting in the applicable accounting guidance. While 
the company met certain criteria for held for sale reporting in prior 
periods, it did not meet all of the criteria until September 30, 2014. 
In addition, at September 30, 2014, the company concluded that 
the Microelectronics business met the criteria for discontinued 
operations reporting. The disposal group constitutes a compo-
nent under accounting guidance. The continuing cash inflows 
and outflows with the discontinued component are related to the 
manufacturing sourcing arrangement and the transition, packag-
ing and test services. These cash flows are not direct cash flows 
as they are not significant and the company will have no significant 
continuing involvement. 
Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the com-
pany’s portfolio of product and services offerings. Green Hat helps 
customers improve the quality of software applications by enabling 
developers to use cloud computing technologies to conduct test-
ing of a software application prior to its delivery. Emptoris expands 
the company’s cloud-based analytics offerings that provide supply 
chain intelligence leading to better inventory management and 
cost efficiencies. Worklight delivers mobile application manage-
ment capabilities to clients across a wide range of industries. The 
acquisition enhanced the company’s comprehensive mobile port-
folio, which is designed to help global corporations leverage the 
proliferation of all mobile devices—from laptops and smartphones 
to tablets. DemandTec delivers cloud-based analytics software to 
help organizations improve their price, promotion and product mix 
within the broad context of enterprise commerce. Varicent’s soft-
ware automates and analyzes data across sales, finance, human 
resources and IT departments to uncover trends and optimize 
sales performance and operations. Vivisimo software automates 
the discovery of big data, regardless of its format or where it 
resides, providing decision makers with a view of key business 
information necessary to drive new initiatives. Tealeaf provides a 
full suite of customer experience management software, which 
analyzes interactions on websites and mobile devices. Butterfly 
offers storage planning software and storage migration tools, help-
ing companies save storage space, operational time, IT budget 
and power consumption. Platform Computing’s focused technical 
and distributed computing management software helps clients 
create, integrate and manage shared computing environments 
that are used in compute-and-data intensive applications such as 
simulations, computer modeling and analytics. TMS designs and 
sells high-performance solid state storage solutions. 
	
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average 
life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is 
6.6 years. These identified intangible assets will be amortized on 
a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,880 mil-
lion was assigned to the Software ($1,412 million), Global Business 
Services (GBS) ($5 million), GTS ($21 million) and STG ($443 mil-
lion) segments. As of the acquisition dates, it was expected that 
approximately 15 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for 
tax purposes.
Divestitures
2014
Microelectronics—On October 20, 2014, IBM and GLOBAL-
FOUNDRIES announced a definitive agreement in which 
GLOBALFOUNDRIES will acquire the company’s Microelectronics 
business, including existing semiconductor manufacturing assets 
and operations in East Fishkill, New York and Essex Junction, 
Vermont. The commercial OEM business to be acquired by GLO-
BALFOUNDRIES includes custom logic and specialty foundry, 
manufacturing and related operations.


===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
101
	
Summarized financial information for discontinued operations 
is shown below.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
Total revenue
$ 1,335
$1,384
$1,633
Loss from discontinued operations, 
before tax
(619)
(720)
(638)
Loss on disposal, before tax
(4,726)
—
—
Total loss from discontinued 
operations, before income taxes
(5,346)
(720)
(638)
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
(1,617)
(322)
(243)
Loss from discontinued 
operations, net of tax
$(3,729)
$  (398 )
$  (395 )
The assets and liabilities at December 31, 2014 presented below 
are classified as held for sale.
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Assets:
Accounts receivable
$245
$   166
Inventory
380
481
Property, plant & equipment, net
—
2,322
Other assets
92
90
Total assets
$717
$3,059 
Liabilities:
Accounts payable
$177
$   172
Deferred income
87
84
Other liabilities
163
20
Total liabilities
$427
$   276 
Industry Standard Server—On January 23, 2014, IBM and Lenovo 
Group Limited (Lenovo) announced a definitive agreement in which 
Lenovo would acquire the company’s industry standard server 
portfolio for an adjusted purchase price of $2.1 billion, consisting 
of approximately $1.8 billion in cash, with the balance in Lenovo 
common stock. The stock represented less than 5 percent 
equity ownership in Lenovo. The company would sell to Lenovo 
its System x, BladeCenter and Flex System blade servers and 
switches, x86-based Flex integrated systems, NeXtScale and 
iDataPlex servers and associated software, blade networking and 
maintenance operations.
	
IBM and Lenovo have entered into a strategic relationship 
which will include a global OEM and reseller agreement for sales of 
IBM’s industry-leading entry and midrange Storwize disk storage 
systems, tape storage systems, General Parallel File System soft-
ware, SmartCloud Entry offering, and elements of IBM’s system 
software, including Systems Director and Platform Computing 
solutions. Effective with the initial closing of the transaction, Lenovo 
has assumed related customer service and maintenance opera-
tions. IBM will continue to provide maintenance delivery and 
warranty services on Lenovo’s behalf for an extended period of 
time. In addition, as part of the transaction agreement, the com-
pany will provide Lenovo with certain transition services, including 
IT and supply chain services. The initial term for these transition 
services ranges from less than one year to three years. Lenovo 
can renew certain services for an additional year.
	
The transaction will be completed in phases. The initial closing 
occurred on October 1, 2014. A subsequent closing occurred in 
most other countries in which there was a large business footprint 
on December 31, 2014. The remaining countries are expected to 
close in early 2015.
	
The company expects to recognize a total pre-tax gain on the 
sale of approximately $1.5 billion, which does not include associ-
ated costs related to transition and performance-based costs. Net 
of these charges, the pre-tax gain is approximately $1.2 billion, of 
which $1.1 billion was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2014. The 
balance of the gain is expected to be recognized in 2019 upon 
conclusion of the maintenance delivery agreement. 
	
The company’s industry standard server business is reported 
in the Systems and Technology segment, and the associated main-
tenance operations are part of the Global Technology Services 
segment. In 2013, this combined business delivered approximately 
$4.6 billion of revenue and was essentially breakeven on a pre-tax 
income basis.
	
The classification of the industry standard server business as 
held for sale at September 30, 2014 was based on meeting all 
of the criteria for such classification in the applicable account-
ing guidance. While the company met certain criteria for held for 
sale classification in prior periods, it did not meet the criteria that 
the disposal group was available for immediate sale in its present 
condition until September 30, 2014. Prior to that date, the company 
was engaged in the regulatory review process and in the activi-
ties necessary to separate the tangible assets and prepare such 
assets for sale. At December 31, 2014, the assets and liabilities 
remaining as held for sale were immaterial.
	
In addition, at September 30, 2014, the company concluded 
that the industry standard server systems business did not meet 
the criteria for discontinued operations reporting. The disposal 
group consists of the industry standard server systems business 
and associated maintenance operations. The industry standard 
server systems business constitutes a component under account-
ing guidance, while the maintenance operations do not meet the 
definition of a component. Due to the significance of the continuing 
cash flows with the disposal group after the transaction closes, the 
company did not meet the criteria to report the industry standard 
server systems business as a discontinued operation. 


===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
102
Others—On June 30, 2014, the company completed the dives-
titures of its solidDB suite of products to UNICOM Systems, Inc. 
and its Human Capital Management business line in France to 
Sopra Group. 
	
On August 31, 2014, the company completed the divestiture of 
its Cognos Finance product to UNICOM Systems, Inc.
	
On September 30, 2014, the company completed the divesti-
tures of its IMS Tools Suite of products to Rocket Software, Inc., 
its Sterling Transportation Management System to Kewill Inc., and 
its ILOG JViews and Elixir Visualization products to Rogue Wave 
Software, Inc.
	
On December 31, 2014, the company completed the dives-
titure of its Focal Point and PurifyPlus product suite to UNICOM 
Systems, Inc. 
	
All of the above transactions closed in 2014 and the financial 
terms related to these transactions were not material. Overall, the 
company recorded a pre-tax gain of $132 million related to these 
transactions in 2014.
2013
Customer Care—On September 10, 2013, IBM and SYNNEX 
announced a definitive agreement in which SYNNEX would 
acquire the company’s worldwide customer care business 
process outsourcing services business for $501 million, consist-
ing of approximately $430 million in cash, net of balance sheet 
adjustments, and $71 million in SYNNEX common stock, which 
represented less than 5 percent equity ownership in SYNNEX. As 
part of the transaction, SYNNEX entered into a multi-year agree-
ment with the company, and Concentrix, SYNNEX’s outsourcing 
business, has become an IBM strategic business partner for global 
customer care business process outsourcing services. 
	
The initial closing of the transaction was completed on Janu-
ary 31, 2014, with subsequent closings occurring in 2014. In the 
fourth quarter of 2014, the company continued to work toward res-
olution of the required final balance sheet adjustments. A charge 
in the amount of $10 million was recorded to reflect the expected 
resolution. For the full year of 2014, the company recorded a pre-
tax gain of $202 million related to this transaction.
Others—In the first quarter of 2013, the company completed the 
divestiture of its Showcase Reporting product set to Help/Sys-
tems. Showcase Reporting, which was acquired by the company 
through the SPSS acquisition in 2009, is an enterprise-class busi-
ness intelligence platform that enables customers to build and 
manage analytical reporting environments.
	
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company completed two 
divestitures, the Applicazioni Contabili Gestionali (ACG) business 
and the Cognos Application Development Tools (ADT) business. 
	
The ACG business was purchased by TeamSystem. The ACG 
product is an Italian Enterprise Resource Planning solution for 
small- and medium-sized companies. The Cognos ADT busi-
ness was purchased by UNICOM Systems, Inc. The Cognos ADT 
product suite represents a legacy family of products that pro-
vide application development environments that would enable 
programmers to develop COBOL applications at a higher pro-
ductivity level. 
	
Financial terms of each transaction did not have a material 
impact in the consolidated financial results.
2012
Retail Stores—On April 17, 2012, the company announced that it 
had signed a definitive agreement with Toshiba TEC for the sale of 
its Retail Store Solutions business. As part of the transaction, the 
company agreed to transfer the maintenance business to Toshiba 
TEC within three years of the original closing of the transaction.
	
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the company completed the fourth 
phase of the transfer of the maintenance workforce to Toshiba. 
A subsequent wave closing is scheduled to be completed in the 
first quarter of 2015. The parts and inventory transfer to Toshiba 
will commence in the first quarter of 2015 and is expected to be 
completed by the third quarter of 2015. The workforce transfer 
and an assessment of the ongoing contractual terms of the overall 
transaction resulted in the recognition of an additional pre-tax gain 
of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2014.
	
The company expects to close the final phase of the divestiture 
in the third quarter of 2015. Overall, the company expects to rec-
ognize a cumulative total pre-tax gain on the sale of approximately 
$517 million, of which $511 million has been recognized through 
December 31, 2014.


===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
103
NOTE D.  
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis 
at December 31, 2014 and 2013. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit
$   —
$3,517
$—
$3,517
Commercial paper
—
764
—
764
Money market funds
662
—
—
662
U.S. government securities
—
410
—
410
Other securities
—
6
—
6
Total
662
4,697
—
5,359 (5)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2)
1
8
—
9
Trading security investments (2)
74
—
—
74
Available-for-sale equity investments (2)
243
—
—
243
Derivative assets (3)
Interest rate contracts
—
633
—
633
Foreign exchange contracts
—
775
—
775
Equity contracts
—
24
—
24
Total
—
1,432
—
1,432 (6)
Total assets
$980
$6,138
$—
$7,118 (6)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (4)
Foreign exchange contracts
—
177
—
177
Equity contracts
—
19
—
19
Total liabilities
$   —
$   196
$—
$   196 (6)
(1)	Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position at December 31, 2014 were $751 million and $681 million, respectively. 
(4)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at 
December 31, 2014 were $165 million and $31 million, respectively. 
(5)	Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
(6)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability 
positions would have been reduced by $97 million each.


===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
104
Loans and Long-Term Receivables
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using cur-
rent interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar 
credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31, 
2014 and 2013, the difference between the carrying amount and 
estimated fair value for loans and long-term receivables was 
immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements, 
these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the 
fair value hierarchy. 
Long-Term Debt
Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted 
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset 
in an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted 
market price is not available, an expected present value technique 
that uses rates currently available to the company for debt with 
similar terms and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair 
value. The carrying amount of long-term debt is $35,073 million 
During the year ended December 31, 2014, the company trans-
ferred trading security investments valued at $74 million from 
Level 2 to Level 1 due to the expiration of certain regulatory restric-
tions. There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the year 
ended December 31, 2013. 
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value
Short-Term Receivables and Payables
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are 
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt 
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt) are financial liabili-
ties with carrying values that approximate fair value. If measured 
at fair value in the financial statements, these financial instruments 
would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit
$      —
$4,754
$—
$4,754
Commercial paper
—
1,507
—
1,507
Money market funds
1,728
—
—
1,728
Other securities
—
8
—
8
Total
1,728
6,269
—
7,997(6)
Debt securities—current (2)
—
350
—
350(6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3)
1
7
—
9
Available-for-sale equity investments (3)
18
—
—
18
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts
—
308
—
308
Foreign exchange contracts
—
375
—
375
Equity contracts
—
36
—
36
Total
—
719
—
719 (7)
Total assets
$1,747
$7,345
$—
$9,092 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Interest rate contracts
$      —
$     13
$—
$     13
Foreign exchange contracts
      —
     484
—
   484
Equity contracts
—
4
—
4
Total liabilities
$      —
$   501
$—
$   501 (7)
(1)	Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	Commercial paper and certificates of deposit reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(3)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position at December 31, 2013 were $318 million and $401 million, respectively. 
(5)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at 
December 31, 2013 were $375 million and $126 million, respectively. 
(6)	Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
(7)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability 
positions would have been reduced by $251 million each. 


===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
105
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Adjusted 
Cost
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
$    7
$3
$ —
$    9
Available-for-sale equity investments (1)
$272
$2 
$31
$243
(1)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Adjusted 
Cost
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
$  7
$1
$—
$  9
Available-for-sale equity investments (1)
$20
$2 
$  4
$18
(1)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
During the fourth quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity 
securities in conjunction with the sale of the industry standard 
server business which are classified as available-for-sale securi-
ties. Gross unrealized losses related to available-for-sale securities 
of $31 million were recorded in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position. 
	
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of Decem-
ber 31, 2014, the company believes that unrealized losses on debt 
and available-for-sale equity securities are temporary and do not 
represent an other-than-temporary impairment.
	
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity investments during 
the period were as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
Proceeds
$21 
$41
$112
Gross realized gains (before taxes)
0
13
45
Gross realized losses (before taxes)
5
5
1
The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale 
debt and equity securities that have been included in other com-
prehensive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/losses 
reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) 
to net income were as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
Net unrealized gains/(losses)  
arising during the period
$(18)
$ 0
Net unrealized (gains)/losses  
reclassified to net income
3
(5)
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale 
debt securities are less than one year at December 31, 2014.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is 
a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the 
normal course of business, the company is exposed to the impact 
of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to 
a lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and client 
credit risk. The company limits these risks by following estab-
lished risk management policies and procedures, including the 
use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt 
in the currencies in which assets are denominated. For interest 
rate exposures, derivatives are used to better align rate move-
ments between the interest rates associated with the company’s 
lease and other financial assets and the interest rates associated 
with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to manage the 
and $32,856 million and the estimated fair value is $37,524 million 
and $34,555 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. 
If measured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term debt 
(including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the 
fair value hierarchy.
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are 
considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value, which is 
not materially different from carrying value, in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position. 
	
During the first quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity 
securities in conjunction with the sale of the customer care busi-
ness which are classified as trading securities. At December 31, 
2014, unrealized gains related to trading securities of $21 million 
were recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings.
	
The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent 
debt and marketable equity securities which are also considered 
available-for-sale and recorded at fair value in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position.


===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
106
related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, derivatives 
are used to better manage the cash flow volatility arising from 
foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
	
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company 
is exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts 
will fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the coun-
terparty credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering 
into contracts with carefully selected major financial institutions 
based upon their overall credit profile. The company’s established 
policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk on principal 
transactions include reviewing and establishing limits for credit 
exposure and continually assessing the creditworthiness of coun-
terparties. The right of set-off that exists under certain of these 
arrangements enables the legal entities of the company subject 
to the arrangement to net amounts due to and from the counter-
party reducing the maximum loss from credit risk in the event of 
counterparty default. 
	
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements 
with most of its major derivative counterparties. These arrange-
ments require the company to hold or post collateral (cash or U.S. 
Treasury securities) when the derivative fair values exceed con-
tractually established thresholds. Posting thresholds can be fixed 
or can vary based on credit default swap pricing or credit ratings 
received from the major credit agencies. The aggregate fair value of 
all derivative instruments under these collateralized arrangements 
that were in a liability position at December 31, 2014 and 2013 was 
$21 million and $216 million, respectively, for which no collateral 
was posted at either date. Full collateralization of these agreements 
would be required in the event that the company’s credit rating 
falls below investment grade or if its credit default swap spread 
exceeds 250 basis points, as applicable, pursuant to the terms of 
the collateral security arrangements. The aggregate fair value of 
derivative instruments in net asset positions as of December 31, 
2014 and 2013 was $1,432 million and $719 million, respectively. 
This amount represents the maximum exposure to loss at the 
reporting date as a result of the counterparties failing to perform 
as contracted. This exposure was reduced by $97 million and $251 
million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, of liabilities 
included in master netting arrangements with those counterpar-
ties. Additionally, at December 31, 2014 and 2013, this exposure 
was reduced by $487 million and $29 million of cash collateral, 
respectively, received by the company. At December 31, 2014 and 
2013, the net exposure related to derivative assets recorded in the 
Statement of Financial Position was $817 million and $439 mil-
lion, respectively. At December 31, 2014 and 2013, the net amount 
related to derivative liabilities recorded in the Statement of Finan-
cial Position was $99 million and $250 million, respectively.
	
In the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the com-
pany does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master 
netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or payables 
recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the 
fair values of the related derivative instruments. No amount was 
recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2014 and 2013 
for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The amount recognized 
in accounts payable for the obligation to return cash collateral 
totaled $487 million and $29 million at December 31, 2014 and 
2013, respectively. The company restricts the use of cash collateral 
received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports it in prepaid 
expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position. No amount was rehypothecated at Decem-
ber 31, 2014 and 2013. At December 31, 2014 the company held 
$31 million in non-cash collateral in U.S. Treasury securities, and 
at December 31, 2013, no non-cash collateral was held. 
	
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the 
volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency 
exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company 
with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as 
net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as 
the derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon matu-
rity which is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the 
underlying hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss 
potential on an ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these 
hedging relationships by de-designating or terminating the deriva-
tive instrument in order to manage the liquidity risk. Although not 
designated as accounting hedges, the company may utilize deriva-
tives to offset the changes in the fair value of the de-designated 
instruments from the date of de-designation until maturity.
	
In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts, 
futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency swaps, 
depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a 
party to leveraged derivative instruments.
	
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized 
by underlying risk, follows.
Interest Rate Risk
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally 
to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-
effective financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the 
underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce 
overall interest cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to 
convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt 
(i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt 
issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At Decem-
ber 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of the company’s 
interest rate swaps was $5.8 billion and $3.1 billion, respectively. 
The weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments 
at December 31, 2014 and 2013 was approximately 8.7 years and 
10.6 years, respectively. 
Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt 
issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest 
payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps 
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have 
any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding at 
December 31, 2014 and 2013.


===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
107
	
At December 31, 2014 and 2013, net gains of approximately 
$1 million (before taxes), respectively, were recorded in AOCI in 
connection with cash flow hedges of the company’s borrowings. 
Within these amounts, less than $1 million of gains, respectively, 
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the 
underlying transactions.
Foreign Exchange Risk
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries  
(Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated 
debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign 
subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused 
by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional 
currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. 
dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign 
exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of deriva-
tive instruments designated as net investment hedges was $2.2 
billion and $3.0 billion, respectively. The weighted-average remain-
ing maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2014 and 2013 
was approximately 0.2 and 0.4 years, respectively.
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional 
currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany pay-
ments for royalties and goods and services among the company’s 
non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation 
of these foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of 
the currency markets, the company selectively employs foreign 
exchange forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These 
forward contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The 
maximum length of time over which the company is hedging its 
exposure to the variability in future cash flows is four years. At 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of forward 
contracts designated as cash flow hedges of forecasted royalty 
and cost transactions was $9.3 billion and $10.2 billion, respec-
tively, with a weighted-average remaining maturity of 0.7 years for 
both periods.
	
At December 31, 2014 and 2013, in connection with cash flow 
hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the com-
pany recorded net gains of $602 million and net losses of $252 
million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. Within these amounts 
$572 million of gains and $166 million of losses, respectively, 
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the 
underlying anticipated transactions.
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign 
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company 
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign 
currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in 
the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are 
accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time 
over which the company hedges its exposure to the variability in 
future cash flows is approximately seven years. At December 31, 
2014, no instruments relating to this program were outstanding. 
At December 31, 2013, the total notional amount of cross cur-
rency swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency 
denominated debt was $1.2 billion.
	
At December 31, 2014 and 2013, in connection with cash flow 
hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings, the com-
pany recorded net losses of $2 million and net losses of $9 million 
(before taxes) in AOCI, respectively. Within these amounts, less than 
$1 million and $3 million of losses, respectively, are expected to be 
reclassified to net income within the next 12 months, providing an 
offsetting economic impact against the underlying exposure. 
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency  
Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the 
cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency 
swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addi-
tion, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to 
economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure 
of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and 
liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap contracts are gen-
erally less than one year. The changes in the fair values of these 
contracts and of the underlying hedged exposures are generally 
offsetting and are recorded in other (income) and expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2014 and 
2013, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in eco-
nomic hedges of foreign currency exposure was $13.1 billion and 
$14.7 billion, respectively.
Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad 
market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to 
certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of 
these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A 
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not 
designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes deriva-
tives, including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge 
the exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. 
The derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad 
market indices or the total return on the company’s common 
stock. They are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also 
reported in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
ings. At December 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of 
derivative instruments in economic hedges of these compensation 
obligations was $1.3 billion for both periods.


===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
108
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets
Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
At December 31:
Balance Sheet 
Classification
2014
2013
Balance Sheet 
Classification
2014
2013
Designated as hedging instruments:
Interest rate contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets 
$       5
$   —
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
$       0
$       0
Investments and 
sundry assets
628
308
Other liabilities
—
13
Foreign exchange contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets
632
187
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
50
331
Investments and 
sundry assets
17
26
Other liabilities
21
112
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$1,281
$522 
Fair value of 
derivative labilities
$     72
$   456
Not designated as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets 
$     90
$  94
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
$   101
$     40
Investments and 
sundry assets
37
67
Other liabilities
4
1
Equity contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets
24
36
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
14
4
Investments and 
sundry assets
0
—
Other liabilities
5
—
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$   151
$197
Fair value of 
derivative liabilities
$   125
$     45
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt
N/A
N/A
$       0
$   190
Long-term debt
N/A
N/A
$7,766
$6,111
Total
$1,432
$719 
$7,963 
$6,802 
N/A—Not applicable
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common 
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed 
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settle-
ment provisions. The company records the changes in the fair 
value of these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Con-
solidated Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any 
warrants qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, 
2014 and 2013.
	
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay 
amounts due under contractual terms. The company may utilize 
credit default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. 
These derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are 
recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
The company did not have any derivative instruments relating to 
this program outstanding at December 31, 2014 and 2013.
	
The company is exposed to market volatility on certain invest-
ment securities. The company may utilize options or forwards 
to economically hedge its market exposure. The derivatives are 
recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
ings. At December 31, 2014, the total notional amount of derivative 
instruments in economic hedges of investment securities was 
$0.1 billion. No amounts were outstanding under this program at 
December 31, 2013.
	
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the 
derivative and non-derivative instrument- related risk management 
activity as of December 31, 2014 and 2013, as well as for the years 
ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.


===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
109
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings Line Item
Recognized on Derivatives (1)
Attributable to Risk Being Hedged (2)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (5)
Interest rate contracts
Cost of financing
$ 231
$(109)
$   65
$(127)
$202
$  59
Interest expense
  206
(74)
55
(114)
138
50
Derivative instruments not designated  
as hedging instruments (1)
Foreign exchange contracts
Other (income) 
and expense
(776)
(328)
(311)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Interest rate contracts
Other (income) 
and expense
34
—
—
N/A
N/A
N/A
Equity contracts
SG&A expense
51
164
110
N/A
N/A
N/A
Other (income) 
and expense
(9)
—
—
N/A
N/A
N/A
Total
$(263)
$(347)
$  (81)
$(241)
$340
$108
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Effective Portion 
Recognized in OCI
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings Line Item
Effective Portion 
Reclassified from AOCI
Ineffectiveness and 
Amounts Excluded from 
Effectiveness Testing (3)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
Derivative instruments in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts
$      —
$   —
$  —
Interest expense
$  (1)
$   —
$   (6)
$—
$—
$ —
Foreign exchange contracts
958
43
32
Other (income) 
and expense
98
162
237
(1)
0
3
Cost of sales
(15)
(34)
7
—
—
—
SG&A expense
15
39
16
—
—
—
Instruments in net investment hedges (4)
 
Foreign exchange contracts
1,136
173
(26) Interest expense
—
—
—
0
3
11
Total
$2,095
$216
$   6
$ 97
$167
$253
$(1)
$  3
$14
(1)	The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under 
these derivative contracts.
(2)	The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated 
hedging relationships during the period. 
(3)	The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships. 
(4)	Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
(5)	For the year ended December 31, 2014, fair value hedges resulted in a gain of $4 million in ineffectiveness. There were no amounts recorded as ineffectiveness on fair value hedges 
for the year ended December 31, 2013.
N/A—Not applicable
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, there 
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings repre-
senting hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment 
of hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with 
an underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to occur 
(for cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal 
course of business.


===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
110
NOTE E.  
INVENTORIES
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Finished goods
$   430
$   444
Work in process and raw materials
1,674
1,866
Total
$2,103
$2,310
NOTE F.  
FINANCING RECEIVABLES
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allow-
ances for credit losses, including residual values.
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Current
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
$  3,781
$  4,004
Commercial financing receivables
8,423
8,541
Client loan and installment  
payment receivables (loans)
7,631
7,243
Total
$19,835
$19,787 
Noncurrent
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
$  4,449
$  5,700
Client loan and installment  
payment receivables (loans)
6,660
7,055
Total
$11,109
$12,755 
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates 
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms 
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales-
type and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual 
values of $671 million and $737 million at December 31, 2014 and 
2013, respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of 
$517 million and $672 million, and net of the allowance for credit 
losses of $165 million and $123 million at those dates, respectively. 
Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding at 
December 31, 2014, expressed as a percentage of the total, are 
approximately: 2015, 49 percent; 2016, 28 percent; 2017, 16 per-
cent; 2018, 6 percent; and 2019 and beyond, 2 percent.
	
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit 
losses of $17 million and $23 million at December 31, 2014 and 
2013, respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts 
receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM 
products. Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable 
financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
	
Client loan and installment payment receivables (loans), net 
of allowance for credit losses of $396 million and $242 million 
at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, are loans that are 
provided primarily to clients to finance the purchase of hardware, 
software and services. Payment terms on these financing arrange-
ments are generally for terms up to seven years.
 	
Client loan receivables and installment payment receivables 
financing contracts are priced independently at competitive 
market rates. The company has a history of enforcing the terms 
of these separate financing agreements.
	
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as col-
lateral for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged 
as collateral for borrowings were $642 million and $769 million at 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. These borrowings are 
included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 115 to 117.
	
The company did not have any financing receivables held for 
sale as of December 31, 2014 and 2013. 
Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
The following tables present financing receivables on a gross 
basis, excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual 
value, by portfolio segment and by class, excluding current com-
mercial financing receivables and other miscellaneous current 
financing receivables at December 31, 2014 and 2013. The com-
pany determines its allowance for credit losses based on two 
portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan receivables, and 
further segments the portfolio into two classes: major markets 
and growth markets. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables
$  5,702
$1,943
$  7,645
Loan receivables
10,049
4,639
14,687
Ending balance
$15,751
$6,581
$22,332
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$15,665
$6,156
$21,821
Individually evaluated for impairment
$       86
$   425
$     511
Allowance for credit losses:
Beginning balance at  
January 1, 2014
Lease receivables
$       42
$     80
$     123
Loan receivables
95
147
242
Total
$     137
$   228
$     365
Write-offs
(18)
(6)
(24)
Provision
3
240
243
Other
(12)
(11)
(23)
Ending balance at  
December 31, 2014
$     111
$   450
$     561
Lease receivables
$       32
$   133
$     165
Loan receivables
$       79
$   317
$     396
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$       42
$     39
$       81
Individually evaluated for impairment
$       69
$   411
$     480


===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
111
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables
$  6,796
$2,200
$  8,996
Loan receivables
10,529
4,012
14,542
Ending balance
$17,325
$6,212
$23,537
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$17,206
$6,013
$23,219
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     119
$   199
$     318
Allowance for credit losses:
Beginning balance at  
January 1, 2013
Lease receivables
$       59
$     55
$     114
Loan receivables
121
84
204
Total
$     180
$   138
$     318
Write-offs
(23)
(10)
(33)
Provision
(21)
105
84
Other
1
(6)
(5)
Ending balance at  
December 31, 2013
$     137
$   228
$     365
Lease receivables
$       42
$     80
$     123
Loan receivables
$       95
$   147
$     242
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$       45
$     48
$       93
Individually evaluated for impairment
$       93
$   179
$     272
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are eval­
uated either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually 
evaluated receivables, the company determines the expected 
cash flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the 
potential loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts 
in which the loss is probable, the company records a specific 
reserve. In addition, the company records an unallocated reserve 
that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different portfo-
lios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. This 
reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, term, 
characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history.
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing 
receivables which were on non-accrual status at December 31, 
2014 and 2013. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Major markets
$  13
$  25
Growth markets
40
34
Total lease receivables
$  53
$  59 
Major markets
$  27
$  40 
Growth markets
151
92
Total loan receivables
$178
$132 
Total receivables
$231
$191 
Impaired Loans
The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated 
reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment, 
loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following 
tables present impaired client loan receivables at December 31, 
2014 and 2013. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Recorded 
Investment
Related 
Allowance
Major markets
$  54
$  47
Growth markets
299
293
Total
$353
$340
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Recorded 
Investment
Related 
Allowance
Major markets
$  79
$  67
Growth markets
122
116
Total
$201
$183
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2014:
Average 
Recorded 
Investment
Interest 
Income 
Recognized
Interest 
Income 
Recognized 
on Cash 
Basis
Major markets
$  68
$0
$—
Growth markets
208
0
—
Total
$276
$0
$—
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2013:
Average 
Recorded 
Investment
Interest 
Income 
Recognized
Interest 
Income 
Recognized 
on Cash 
Basis
Major markets
$  76
$0
$0
Growth markets
97
0 
0
Total
$173
$0
$0


===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
112
Credit Quality Indicators
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based on 
rating agency data, publicly available information and information 
provided by customers, are reviewed periodically based on the 
relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating 
system that maps to Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services credit 
ratings as shown below. The company uses information provided 
by Standard & Poor’s, where available, as one of many inputs in 
its determination of customer credit rating.
	
The tables present the gross recorded investment for each 
class of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 
2014 and 2013. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging 
from AAA to BBB- are considered investment grade. All others are 
considered non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do 
not reflect mitigation actions that the company may take to transfer 
credit risk to third parties.
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
AAA – AA-
$   563
$     46
A+ – A-
1,384
178
BBB+ – BBB-
1,704
900
BB+ – BB
1,154
272
BB- – B+
470
286
B – B-
372
176
CCC+ – D
55
85
Total
$5,702
$1,943
Loan Receivables 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
AAA – AA-
$     993
$   110
A+ – A-
2,438
425
BBB+ – BBB-
3,003
2,148
BB+ – BB
2,034
649
BB- – B+
827
683
B – B-
655
420
CCC+ – D
98
203
Total
$10,049
$4,639
At December 31, 2014, the industries which made up Global 
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (40 per-
cent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Government (13 percent), 
Services (9 percent), Retail (8 percent), Communications (6 per-
cent), Healthcare (5 percent) and Other (5 percent). 
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
AAA – AA-
$   743
$     68
A+ – A-
1,513
168
BBB+ – BBB-
2,111
957
BB+ – BB
1,393
350
BB- – B+
595
368
B – B-
365
214
CCC+ – D
76
74
Total
$6,796 
$2,200 
Loan Receivables 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
AAA – AA-
$  1,151
$   125
A+ – A-
2,344
307
BBB+ – BBB-
3,271
1,745
BB+ – BB
2,158
638
BB- – B+
922
672
B – B-
565
391
CCC+ – D
118
134
Total
$10,529
$4,012 
At December 31, 2013, the industries which made up Global 
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (39 per-
cent), Government (14 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Retail 
(8 percent), Services (8 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Com-
munications (6 percent) and Other (4 percent). 


===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
113
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Total 
Past Due 
> 90 Days*
Current
Total 
Financing 
Receivables
Recorded 
Investment 
> 90 Days 
and Accruing
Major markets
$  6 
$  5,696
$  5,702
$  6 
Growth markets
32
1,911
1,943
14
Total lease receivables
$38 
$  7,607
$  7,645
$20 
Major markets
$  9 
$10,040
$10,049
$  9
Growth markets
35
4,603
4,639
18
Total loan receivables
$44 
$14,643
$14,687
$27 
Total
$82
$22,250
$22,332
$47
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Total 
Past Due 
> 90 Days*
Current
Total 
Financing 
Receivables
Recorded 
Investment 
> 90 Days 
and Accruing
Major markets
$  6 
$  6,789
$  6,796
$  5
Growth markets
19 
2,181
2,200
11
Total lease receivables
$25
$  8,970
$  8,996
$16 
Major markets
$  9
$10,520
$10,529
$  6
Growth markets
34
3,979
4,012
18
Total loan receivables
$43
$14,499
$14,542
$25
Total
$68
$23,469
$23,537
$41
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved. 
Troubled Debt Restructurings
The company assessed all restructurings that occurred on or 
after January 1, 2013 and determined that there were no significant 
troubled debt restructurings for the years ended December 31, 
2013 and 2014.
NOTE G.  
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Land and land improvements
$     667
$     706
Buildings and building improvements
9,524
9,680
Plant, laboratory and office equipment
27,388
28,169
Plant and other property—gross
37,578
38,555
Less: Accumulated depreciation
27,500
25,576
Plant and other property—net
10,078
12,979
Rental machines
1,456
1,920
Less: Accumulated depreciation
763
1,078
Rental machines—net
693
842
Total—net
$10,771
$13,821 
NOTE H.  
INVESTMENTS AND SUNDRY ASSETS
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Deferred transition and setup costs  
and other deferred arrangements*
$1,527
$1,652
Derivatives—noncurrent 
681
401
Alliance investments
Equity method
98
110
Non-equity method
496
200
Prepaid software
332
352
Long-term deposits
300
316
Other receivables
509
174
Employee benefit-related
356
   392 
Prepaid income taxes
518
305
Other assets
788
738
Total
$5,603
$4,639 
* Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related to 
Global Services client arrangements. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” 
on page 89 for additional information. 


===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
114
NOTE I.  
INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL
Intangible Assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset bal-
ances by major asset class.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,375
$   (679)
$   696
Client relationships
2,208
(1,271)
937
Completed technology
2,831
(1,533)
1,298
In-process R&D
—
—
—
Patents/trademarks
374
(214)
161
Other*
18
(6)
12
Total
$6,806
$(3,702)
$3,104
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,494 
$   (699)
$   794
Client relationships
2,148
(977)
1,171
Completed technology
2,910
(1,224)
1,687
In-process R&D
13
—
13
Patents/trademarks
358
(154)
204
Other*
7
(5)
2
Total
$6,930 
$(3,059)
$3,871 
* Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business 
processes, methodologies and systems.
The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased $768 mil-
lion during the year ended December 31, 2014, primarily due to 
amortization, partially offset by intangible asset additions resulting 
from acquisitions. There was no impairment of intangible assets 
recorded in 2014 and 2013. The aggregate intangible amortization 
expense was $1,347 million and $1,351 million for the years ended 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In addition, in 2014 and 
2013, respectively, the company retired $724 million and $1,177 mil-
lion of fully amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross 
carrying amount and accumulated amortization by this amount. 
	
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years 
relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at 
December 31, 2014:
($ in millions)
Capitalized 
Software
Acquired 
Intangibles
Total
2015
$420
$648
$1,068
2016
211
605
816
2017
65
494
559
2018
—
349
349
2019
—
210
210


===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
115
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2014
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase 
Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments
Balance 
December 31, 
2014
Global Business Services
$  4,334 
$   —
$   0
$     0
$(248)
$  4,086
Global Technology Services
4,129
11
20
(54)
(109)
3,998
Software
21,121
430
(17)
(19)
(516)
21,000
Systems and Technology
1,601
—
—
(110)
(19)
1,472
Total
$31,184
$442
$   4
$(183)
$(891)
$30,556
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2013
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase 
Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments
Balance 
December 31, 
2013
Global Business Services
$  4,357
$     —
$  0
$(3)
$  (21)
$  4,334
Global Technology Services
2,916
1,246
17
—
(50)
4,129
Software
20,405
987
11
(4)
(279)
21,121
Systems and Technology
1,568
13
33
—
(14)
1,601
Total
$29,247 
$2,246 
$61
$(7)
$(363 )
$31,184 
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2014 and 2013 were 
related to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to Decem-
ber 31, 2013 or December 31, 2012, respectively, and were still 
subject to the measurement period that ends at the earlier of 
12 months from the acquisition date or when information becomes 
available. There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded in 
2014 or 2013 and the company has no accumulated goodwill 
impairment losses.
NOTE J.  
BORROWINGS
Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Commercial paper
$   650
$2,458 
Short-term loans
480
551
Long-term debt—current maturities
4,601
3,854
Total
$5,731
$6,862 
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at both 
December 31, 2014 and 2013 was 0.1 percent. The weighted-
average interest rates for short-term loans was 4.0 percent and 
5.1 percent at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. 


===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
116
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31:
Maturities
2014
2013
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2014):
0.97%
2015 – 2016
$  9,254
$  6,456**
4.73%
2017 – 2018
  6,835
8,465
2.19%
2019 –2021
6,555
6,206
1.88%
2022
1,000
1,000
3.38%
2023
1,500
1,500
3.63%
2024
2,000
—
7.00%
2025
600
600
6.22%
2027
469
469
6.50%
2028
313
313
5.88%
2032
600
600
8.00%
2038
83
83
5.60%
2039
745
745
4.00%
2042
1,107
1,107
7.00%
2045
27
27
7.13%
2096
316
316
31,404
27,887
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2014, in parentheses):
Euros (1.85%)
2015 – 2025
5,463
5,894
Pound sterling (2.75%)
2017 – 2020
1,176
1,254
Japanese yen (0.5%)
2017 – 2019
733
1,057
Swiss francs (3.8%)
2015 – 2020
162
181
Canadian (2.2%)
2017
432
471
Other (10.1%)
2015 – 2017
367
291
39,737
37,036
Less: net unamortized discount
853
872
Add: fair value adjustment*
792
546
39,675
36,710
Less: current maturities
4,601
3,854
Total
$35,073
$32,856 
  * The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the 
debt’s carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
** Includes $17 million of debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital, LLC, an indirect 100-percent owned finance subsidiary of the company, which matured in the 
first half of 2014. Debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital, LLC are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the company.


===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
117
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
(in millions)
2014
2013
For the year ended December 31:
Amount
Average Rate
Amount
Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt 
$27,255
3.09%
$30,123
3.07%
Floating-rate debt* 
12,420
0.82%
6,587
0.87%
Total
$39,675
$36,710
* Includes $5,839 million in 2014 and $3,106 million in 2013 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D, 
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 105 through 109). 
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its 
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which 
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit 
the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and 
leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s consoli-
dated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s ability to 
merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met. The credit 
facilities also include a covenant on the company’s consolidated 
net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, 
as well as a cross default provision with respect to other defaulted 
indebtedness of at least $500 million. 
	
The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt 
covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. The 
failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event 
of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply. 
If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest 
on the debt to which such event of default applied would become 
immediately due and payable.
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt out-
standing at December 31, 2014, are as follows: 
($ in millions)
Total
2015
$  4,600
2016
5,331
2017
5,242
2018
2,621
2019
4,069
2020 and beyond
17,874
Total
$39,737
Interest on Debt
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
Cost of financing
$   542 
$   587
$   545
Interest expense
484
405
470
Net investment derivative activity 
0
(3)
(11)
Interest capitalized
4
22
18
Total interest paid and accrued
$1,030 
$1,011 
$1,022 
Refer to the related discussion on page 148 in note T, “Segment 
Information,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing seg-
ment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 105 through 
109 for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps 
in the company’s debt risk management program. 
Lines of Credit
In 2014, the company extended the term of its five-year, $10 billion 
Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) by one year to Novem-
ber 10, 2019. The total expense recorded by the company related 
to this global credit facility was $5.4 million in 2014, $5.4 million in 
2013 and $5.3 million in 2012. The Credit Agreement permits the 
company and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion 
on a revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary Borrowers will be 
unconditionally backed by the company. The company may also, 
upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of the additional 
banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement, increase the 
commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an additional $2.0 
billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit Agreement, the com-
pany and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow, prepay and reborrow 
amounts under the Credit Agreement at any time during the Credit 
Agreement. Interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Agree-
ment will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as further 
described in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement contains 
customary representations and warranties, covenants, events of 
default, and indemnification provisions. The company believes that 
circumstances that might give rise to breach of these covenants 
or an event of default, as specified in the Credit Agreement, are 
remote. As of December 31, 2014, there were no borrowings by the 
company, or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Agreement.
	
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some 
of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Inter-
est rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit 
vary from country to country, depending on local market conditions.


===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
118
NOTE K.  
OTHER LIABILITIES
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Income tax reserves
$3,146
$3,189 
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
1,658
1,673
Disability benefits
675
699
Derivative liabilities
31
126
Special restructuring actions
431
440
Workforce reductions
469
500
Deferred taxes
288
1,741
Other taxes payable
17
186
Environmental accruals
240
231
Warranty accruals
91
171
Asset retirement obligations
136
129
Acquisition related
50
205
Divestiture related* 
1,124
40
Other
536
604
Total
$8,892
$9,934 
* Primarily includes accruals in 2014 related to the expected divestiture of the Micro-
electronics business.
In response to changing business needs, the company periodi-
cally takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, 
cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent 
contractually obligated future payments associated with these 
activities are reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the 
previous table.
	
In addition, the company executed certain special restruc-
turing-related actions prior to 2006. The previous table provides 
the noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. 
Current liabilities are included in other accrued expenses and 
liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and 
were immaterial at December 31, 2014. 
	
The noncurrent liabilities are workforce accruals related to ter-
minated employees who are no longer working for the company 
who were granted annual payments to supplement their incomes 
in certain countries. Depending on the individual country’s legal 
requirements, these required payments will continue until the 
former employee begins receiving pension benefits or passes away.
	
The company employs extensive internal environmental protec-
tion programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company 
also participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at 
a number of locations, including operating facilities, previously 
owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum 
exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and 
no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO environmental 
liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The total amounts 
accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities, including amounts 
classified as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position, that do not reflect actual or anticipated insurance recov-
eries, were $254 million and $245 million at December 31, 2014 
and 2013, respectively. Estimated environmental costs are not 
expected to materially affect the consolidated financial position or 
consolidated results of the company’s operations in future periods. 
However, estimates of future costs are subject to change due to 
protracted cleanup periods and changing environmental remedia-
tion regulations.
	
As of December 31, 2014, the company was unable to esti-
mate the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for 
certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are 
primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is 
not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and 
non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would remediate 
only if it performed major renovations of certain existing buildings. 
Because these conditional obligations have indeterminate settle-
ment dates, the company could not develop a reasonable estimate 
of their fair values. The company will continue to assess its ability 
to estimate fair values at each future reporting date. The related 
liability will be recognized once sufficient additional information 
becomes available. The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, 
including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated State-
ment of Financial Position were $180 million and $160 million at 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
NOTE L.  
EQUITY ACTIVITY
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which 
990,523,759 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2014 and 
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par 
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2014. 
Stock Repurchases
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM 
common stock. The company repurchased 71,504,867 common 
shares at a cost of $13,395 million, 73,121,942 common shares 
at a cost of $13,993 million and 61,246,371 common shares at a 
cost of $12,008 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. These 
amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of 
each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may 
differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions. At 
December 31, 2014, $6,264 million of Board common stock repur-
chase authorization was available. The company plans to purchase 
shares on the open market or in private transactions from time to 
time, depending on market conditions.


===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
119
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2014:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$(1,636)
$  (438)
$(2,074)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$     (29)
$     11
$     (18)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
5
(2)
3
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
0
0
0
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$     (24)
$       9
$     (15)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$    958
$  (341)
$    618
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales
15
(7)
9
SG&A expense
(15)
6
(9)
Other (income) and expense
(98)
38
(60)
Interest expense
1
0
0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$    861
$  (304)
$    557
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits)
$        1
$       0
$        1
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(9,799)
3,433
(6,366)
Curtailments and settlements
24
(7)
17
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(114)
41
(73)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,531
(852)
1,678
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$(7,357)
$2,615
$(4,742)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$(8,156)
$1,883
$(6,274)
(1)	These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131 to 145 for additional information.)
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part 
of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock pur-
chase plan: 7,687,026 shares in 2014, 9,961,389 shares in 2013, and 
15,091,320 shares in 2012. The company issued 1,264,232 treasury 
shares in 2014, 1,849,883 treasury shares in 2013 and 2,746,169 
treasury shares in 2012, as a result of restricted stock unit releases 
and exercises of stock options by employees of certain acquired 
businesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the 
company’s stock-based compensation plans, 1,313,569 common 
shares at a cost of $236 million, 1,666,069 common shares at a 
cost of $336 million and 2,406,007 common shares at a cost of 
$468 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively, were remitted by 
employees in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding 
requirements. These amounts are included in the treasury stock 
balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and 
the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.


===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
120
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2013:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$(1,335)
$     (66)
$(1,401)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$       (4)
$        2
$       (3)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
(8)
2
(5)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
4
(1)
3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$       (8)
$        3
$       (5)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$      43 
$     (15)
$      28
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales
34
(14)
21
SG&A expense
(39)
14
(25)
Other (income) and expense
(162)
62
(99)
Interest expense
0
0
0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$   (123)
$      47
$     (76)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits)
$      16
$        0
$      16
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
5,369
(1,974)
3,395
Curtailments and settlements
(3)
1
(2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(114)
40
(75)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
3,499
(1,195)
2,304
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$ 8,767
$(3,128)
$ 5,639
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 7,301
$(3,144)
$ 4,157
(1)	These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131 to 145 for additional information.)


===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
121
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2012:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$    (44)
$     10
$     (34)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$       8
$      (4)
$        4
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
(42)
17
(25)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
20
(8)
12
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$     (14)
$       5
$       (9)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$      32 
$    (27)
$        5
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales
(7)
(6)
(13)
SG&A expense
(16)
4
(12)
Other (income) and expense
(237)
91
(146)
Interest expense
6
(3)
3
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$   (220)
$     59
$   (161)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
$(7,489)
$2,327
$(5,162)
Curtailments and settlements
(2)
0
(2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(148)
59
(89)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,457
(874)
1,583
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$(5,182)
$1,513
$(3,669)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$(5,460)
$1,587
$(3,874)
(1)	These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131 to 145 for additional information.)
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Unrealized 
Gains/(Losses) 
on Cash Flow 
Hedges
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
Adjustments*
Net Change 
Retirement- 
Related 
Benefit 
Plans
Net Unrealized 
Gains/(Losses) 
on Available- 
For-Sale 
Securities
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2011
$   71
$ 1,767
$(23,737)
$ 13
$(21,885)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
5
(34)
(5,164)
16
(5,177)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(167)
0
1,495
(25)
1,303
Total change for the period
(161)
(34)
(3,669)
(9)
(3,874)
December 31, 2012
(90)
1,733
(27,406)
4
(25,759)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
28
(1,401)
3,409
0
2,036
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(103)
0
2,229
(5)
2,121
Total change for the period
(76)
(1,401)
5,639
(5)
4,157
December 31, 2013
(165)
332
(21,767)
(1)
(21,602)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
618
(2,074)
(6,348)
(18)
(7,822)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(60)
0
1,605
3
1,548
Total change for the period
557
(2,074)
(4,742)
(15)
(6,274)
December 31, 2014
$ 392
$(1,742)
$(26,509)
$(15 )
$(27,875)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax. 


===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
122
NOTE M.  
CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with 
clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as plain-
tiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, 
investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time 
to time in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a 
leader in the information technology industry and, as such, has 
been and will continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP 
rights and associated products and offerings, including claims of 
copyright and patent infringement and violations of trade secrets 
and other IP rights. In addition, the company enforces its own IP 
against infringement, through license negotiations, lawsuits or oth-
erwise. Also, as is typical for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, 
the company is party to actions and proceedings in various juris-
dictions involving a wide range of labor and employment issues 
(including matters related to contested employment decisions, 
country-specific labor and employment laws, and the company’s 
pension, retirement and other benefit plans), as well as actions with 
respect to contracts, product liability, securities, foreign opera-
tions, competition law and environmental matters. These actions 
may be commenced by a number of different parties, including 
competitors, clients, current or former employees, government and 
regulatory agencies, stockholders and representatives of the loca-
tions in which the company does business. Some of the actions to 
which the company is party may involve particularly complex tech-
nical issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under 
the laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise.
	
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, 
suit, investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability 
has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably 
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such 
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 
were not material to the company’s results of continuing opera-
tions and financial position.
	
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the com-
pany provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of 
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the com-
pany also discloses matters based on its consideration of other 
matters and qualitative factors, including the experience of other 
companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee 
relations considerations.
 	
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and 
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time 
that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for exam-
ple, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the 
company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remain-
ing claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this 
Note, the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably 
possible losses or range of losses, including losses in excess of 
amounts accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, 
investigations and proceedings are inherently uncertain, and it 
is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these matters. 
It is the company’s experience that damage amounts claimed 
in litigation against it are unreliable and unrelated to possible 
outcomes, and as such are not meaningful indicators of the com-
pany’s potential liability. Further, the company is unable to provide 
such an estimate due to a number of other factors with respect 
to these claims, suits, investigations and proceedings, including 
considerations of the procedural status of the matter in ques-
tion, the presence of complex or novel legal theories, and/or the 
ongoing discovery and development of information important to 
the matters. The company reviews claims, suits, investigations 
and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions are made with 
respect to recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing rea-
sonably possible losses or range of losses (individually or in the 
aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement discus-
sions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews by 
counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter.
	
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined 
in any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably 
have a material effect on the company’s business, financial condi-
tion, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number 
of variables, including: the timing and amount of such losses or 
damages; the structure and type of any such remedies; the sig-
nificance of the impact any such losses, damages or remedies 
may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements; and the 
unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter that may 
give rise to additional factors. While the company will continue to 
defend itself vigorously, it is possible that the company’s business, 
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows could be 
affected in any particular period by the resolution of one or more 
of these matters.
	
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters 
involving the company.
	
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 
in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. 
IBM). The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. 
Plaintiff is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX 
IP rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition, 
interference with contract and breach of contract with regard to 
the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of 
code to Linux and the company has asserted counterclaims. On 
September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, and all 
proceedings in this case were stayed. The court in another suit, the 


===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
123
SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010. The jury 
found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare copyrights; 
the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated to recognize 
Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and Sequent for 
breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30, 2011, the Tenth 
Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling and 
denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In June 2013, the Federal Court 
in Utah granted SCO’s motion to reopen the SCO v. IBM case, and 
proceedings have resumed in that case. 
	
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf 
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued one 
another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the modern-
ization of social service program processing in Indiana. The State 
terminated the contract, claiming that IBM was in breach, and 
the State is seeking damages. IBM believes the State’s claims 
against it are without merit and is seeking payment of termina-
tion amounts specified in the contract. After six weeks of trial, on 
July 18, 2012, the Indiana Superior Court in Marion County rejected 
the State’s claims in their entirety and awarded IBM $52 million 
plus interest and costs. On February 13, 2014, the Indiana Court 
of Appeals reversed portions of the trial judge’s findings, found 
IBM in material breach, and ordered the case remanded to the 
trial judge to determine the State’s damages, if any. The Indiana 
Court of Appeals also affirmed approximately $50 million of the 
trial court’s award of damages to IBM. This matter remains pend-
ing in the Indiana courts.
	
On April 16, 2014, Iusacell SA de C.V. (Iusacell) sued IBM, claim-
ing that IBM made fraudulent misrepresentations that induced 
Iusacell to enter into an agreement with IBM Mexico. Iusacell claims 
damages for lost profits. Iusacell’s complaint relates to a contrac-
tual dispute in Mexico, which is the subject of a pending arbitration 
proceeding in Mexico initiated by IBM Mexico against Iusacell for 
breach of the underlying agreement. On November 14, 2014, the 
District Court in the Southern District of New York granted IBM’s 
motion to stay Iusacell’s action against the company pending the 
arbitration in Mexico between Iusacell and IBM Mexico.
	
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal proceed-
ings in May 2010 before the High Court in London against the 
IBM UK Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative 
beneficiaries of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a 
declaration that it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the 
UK Trust that it was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future 
accruals for most participants and in implementing the company’s 
new retirement policy. In April 2014, the High Court acknowledged 
that the changes made to its UK defined benefit plans were within 
IBM’s discretion, but ruled that IBM breached its implied duty of 
good faith both in implementing these changes and in the manner 
in which it consulted with employees. Proceedings to determine 
remedies were held in July 2014 and in February 2015 the High 
Court held that for IBM to make changes to accruals under the 
plan would require a new consultation of the participants, but to 
make other changes (including to early retirement policy) would 
not require such consultation. IBM intends to appeal both the 
breach and remedies judgments. In addition, IBM UK is a defen-
dant in approximately 290 individual actions brought since early 
2010 by participants of the defined benefits plans who left IBM 
UK. These actions, which allege constructive dismissal and age 
discrimination, are pending before the Employment Tribunal in 
Southampton UK.
	
In a separate but related proceeding, in October 2012, the 
High Court held that the 1983 Trust Deeds and Rules should be 
modified to allow certain categories of current IBM UK employ-
ees who are members of the C Plan to retire from the age of 60 
(rather than from the age of 63) without actuarial reduction of their 
defined benefit pension. In a supplementary ruling in December 
2012, the Court declined to similarly modify the Trust Deeds and 
Rules for former employees who were C Plan members and who 
left the company prior to retirement. Neither party appealed these 
judgments. As a result of the October 2012 ruling, IBM recorded 
a pre-tax retirement-related obligation of $162 million in the third 
quarter of 2012.
	
On March 24, 2014, in a suit brought by local Works Councils, 
the Supreme Court of Spain held that IBM Spain’s Defined Contri-
bution (DC) Plan implemented in 1993 was null and void, and held 
that current employees could reinstate their rights to a Defined 
Benefit (DB) Plan, although with an offset for DC contributions paid 
to date. The Court held that IBM Spain did not consult with the 
Works Councils in seeking the voluntary participation of employ-
ees in changing the pension scheme, and recommended that IBM 
Spain and the Works Councils engage in discussions over how to 
carry out the offset. The ruling is declaratory only. IBM Spain has 
requested leave to appeal the decision to the Constitutional Court. 
The matter remains pending in the Spanish courts.
	
In March 2011, the company announced that it had agreed to 
settle a civil enforcement action with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) relating to alleged violations of the Foreign Cor-
rupt Practices Act of 1977. On July 25, 2013, the court approved 
that 2011 settlement and required that for a two-year period IBM 
make reports to the SEC and the court on certain matters, includ-
ing those relating to compliance with the FCPA. In early 2012, IBM 
notified the SEC of an investigation by the Polish Central Anti-Cor-
ruption Bureau involving allegations of illegal activity by a former 
IBM Poland employee in connection with sales to the Polish gov-
ernment. IBM is cooperating with the SEC and Polish authorities in 
this matter. In April 2013, IBM learned that the U.S. Department of 
Justice (DOJ) is also investigating allegations related to the Poland 
matter, as well as allegations relating to transactions in Argentina, 
Bangladesh and Ukraine. The DOJ is also seeking information 
regarding the company’s global FCPA compliance program and 
its public sector business. The company is cooperating with the 
DOJ in this matter.


===== PAGE 125 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
124
the company customarily agrees to hold the other party harm-
less against losses arising from a breach of representations and 
covenants related to such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP 
rights, specified environmental matters, third-party performance 
of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain income taxes. 
In each of these circumstances, payment by the company is 
conditioned on the other party making a claim pursuant to the 
procedures specified in the particular contract, the procedures of 
which typically allow the company to challenge the other party’s 
claims. While typically indemnification provisions do not include a 
contractual maximum on the company’s payment, the company’s 
obligations under these agreements may be limited in terms of time 
and/or nature of claim, and in some instances, the company may 
have recourse against third parties for certain payments made by 
the company.
 	
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of 
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the 
conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique 
facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. 
Historically, payments made by the company under these agree-
ments have not had a material effect on the company’s business, 
financial condition or results of operations.
	
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial 
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these 
financial guarantees was $46 million and $44 million at Decem-
ber 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The fair value of the guarantees 
recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
was immaterial.
NOTE N.  
TAXES
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
Income from continuing operations 
before income taxes
U.S. operations
$  7,509
$  7,577
$10,306
Non-U.S. operations
12,477
12,667 
12,234 
Total income from continuing 
operations before income taxes
$19,986 
$20,244 
$22,540 
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
The income from continuing operations provision for income taxes 
by geographic operations is as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
U.S. operations
$2,093
$1,315 
$2,825 
Non-U.S. operations
2,141
2,048
2,716
Total continuing operations 
provision for income taxes
$4,234
$3,363 
$5,541 
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
	
The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after 
January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York, 
county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The com-
plaints allege numerous and different causes of action, including 
for negligence and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass. 
Plaintiffs in these cases seek medical monitoring and claim dam-
ages in unspecified amounts for a variety of personal injuries 
and property damages allegedly arising out of the presence of 
groundwater contamination and vapor intrusion of groundwater 
contaminants into certain structures in which plaintiffs reside 
or resided, or conducted business, allegedly resulting from the 
release of chemicals into the environment by the company at its 
former manufacturing and development facility in Endicott. These 
complaints also seek punitive damages in an unspecified amount. 
	
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceed-
ings brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and 
Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to 
CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to 
participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership 
of sites. The company is also conducting environmental investiga-
tions, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity of several 
current or former operating sites globally pursuant to permits, 
administrative orders or agreements with country, state or local 
environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and claims 
concerning certain current or former operating sites.
	
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and 
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with 
many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the com-
pany is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities 
regarding non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litiga-
tion matters. The total potential amount related to these matters for 
all applicable years is approximately $630 million. The company 
believes it will prevail on these matters and that this amount is not 
a meaningful indicator of liability. 
Commitments
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities 
include unused amounts of $5,365 million and $5,028 million at 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. A portion of these 
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to 
support their working capital needs. In addition, the company has 
committed to provide future financing to its clients in connection 
with client purchase agreements for approximately $1,816 million 
and $1,769 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
	
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor 
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of 
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a 
description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
	
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant 
to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with 
respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the 
context of contracts entered into by the company, under which 


===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
125
The components of the income from continuing operations provi-
sion for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
U.S. federal
Current
$ 1,134
$1,694
$1,556
Deferred
105
(708)
415
1,239
986
1,971
U.S. state and local
Current
541
277
168
Deferred
(105)
(330)
291
436
(53)
459
Non-U.S.
Current
2,825
3,067
3,006
Deferred
(266)
(637)
105
2,559
2,430
3,111
Total continuing operations provision 
for income taxes
4,234
3,363
5,541
Discontinued operations provision 
for income taxes
(1,617)
(322)
(243)
Provision for social security,  
real estate, personal property  
and other taxes
4,068
4,198
4,331
Total taxes included in net income
$ 6,685
$7,238 
$9,629 
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the com-
pany’s effective tax rate from continuing operations is as follows: 
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
Statutory rate
35%
35%
35%
Foreign tax differential
(14)
(13)
(10)
State and local
1
0
1
Domestic incentives
(2)
(3)
(1)
Other
1
(2)
0
Effective rate
21%
17%
25%
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes.
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconcili-
ation above labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects 
of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. 
statutory rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax impacts of 
non-U.S. earnings repatriation and any net impacts of intercom-
pany transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements or 
changes in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated 
with each of these items.
	
The 2014 continuing operations tax rate increased 4.6 points 
from 2013 due to the lack of the following 2013 benefits: the com-
pletion of the 2008–2010 U.S. tax audit and associated reserve 
redeterminations (11.1 points), the retroactive impact of the 2012 
American Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points), a tax agreement requir-
ing a reassessment of certain valuation allowances on deferred 
tax assets (1.4 points), the resolution of certain non-U.S. tax audits 
(0.7 points) and newly enacted U.S. state tax legislation (0.6 points), 
as well as a tax charge related to the divestiture of the industry 
standard server business (0.9 points).
	
These increases were partially offset by benefits due to the 
following: the year-to-year reduction in tax charges related to cer-
tain intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries and the 
licensing of certain intellectual property (3.7 points), the increased 
utilization of foreign tax credits (4.7 points), and a more favorable 
geographic mix of pre-tax income in 2014 (2.5 points).
	
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and lia-
bilities did not have a material impact on the company’s effective 
tax rate.
	
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabili-
ties that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position were as follows: 
Deferred Tax Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013*
Retirement benefits
$  4,795
$  3,704
Share-based and other compensation
1,328
1,262
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards
858
982
Deferred income
957
964
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards
686
651
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves
529
592
Depreciation
329
382
Accruals
1,176
322
Other
1,306
1,452
Gross deferred tax assets
11,964
10,311
Less: valuation allowance
646
734
Net deferred tax assets
$11,318
$  9,577 
* Reclassified to conform with 2014 presentation.
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
Depreciation
$   487
$1,346 
Retirement benefits
205
1,219
Goodwill and intangible assets
1,263
1,173
Leases
912
1,119
Software development costs
421
558
Deferred transition costs
374
424
Other
1,111
841
Gross deferred tax liabilities
$4,773
$6,680 


===== PAGE 127 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
126
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and 
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $579 mil-
lion, as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $965 
million. Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at 
least two years or are available for 10 years or more.
	
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2014 principally 
applies to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards that, 
in the opinion of management, are more likely than not to expire 
unutilized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these 
carry­forwards are realized in the future, the reduction in the valu-
ation allowance will reduce income tax expense.
	
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2014 
increased by $646 million in 2014 to $5,104 million. A reconciliation 
of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits 
is as follows:
($ in millions)
2014
2013
2012
Balance at January 1
$4,458
$ 5,672 
$5,575 
Additions based on tax positions 
related to the current year
697
829
401
Additions for tax positions  
of prior years
586
417
215
Reductions for tax positions  
of prior years (including impacts 
due to a lapse in statute)
(579)
(2,201)
(425)
Settlements
(58)
(259)
(94)
Balance at December 31
$5,104
$ 4,458 
$5,672 
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current 
and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain 
tax incentives and credits, divestitures, acquisition-related matters 
and state issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized 
tax benefits for tax positions of prior years are primarily attribut-
able to currency, non-U.S. audits and impacts due to lapses in 
statutes of limitation.
	
In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of the 
Japan Tax Authorities with respect to certain foreign tax losses. 
The tax benefit of these losses totals $1,000 million as of Decem-
ber 31, 2014. The 2014 decrease of $141 million was driven by 
currency and has been included in the 2014 reductions for tax 
positions of prior years. In April 2011, the company received notifi-
cation that the appeal was denied, and in June 2011, the company 
filed a lawsuit challenging this decision. In May 2014, the Tokyo 
District Court ruled in favor of the company. The Japanese gov-
ernment has appealed the ruling to the Tokyo High Court. No final 
determination has been reached on this matter.
	
The liability at December 31, 2014 of $5,104 million can be 
reduced by $875 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with 
the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, U.S. 
tax credits, state income taxes and timing adjustments. The net 
amount of $4,229 million, if recognized, would favorably affect the 
company’s effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 
2013 and 2012 were $3,902 million and $5,099 million, respectively.
	
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are 
included in income tax expense. During the year ended Decem-
ber 31, 2014, the company recognized $216 million in interest 
expense and penalties; in 2013, the company recognized a benefit 
of $93 million in interest expense and penalties, and in 2012, the 
company recognized $134 million in interest expense and penal-
ties. The company has $593 million for the payment of interest 
and penalties accrued at December 31, 2014, and had $417 million 
accrued at December 31, 2013.
	
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reason-
ably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits 
associated with certain positions may be significantly reduced. 
The potential decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits 
is primarily associated with the anticipated resolution of the com-
pany’s U.S. income tax audit for 2011 and 2012, as well as various 
non-U.S. audits. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax 
benefits at December 31, 2014 could be reduced by approximately 
$1 billion. 
	
The company is subject to taxation in the U.S. and various 
state and foreign jurisdictions. With respect to major U.S. state 
and foreign taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer 
subject to tax examinations for years prior to 2009. The company is 
no longer subject to income tax examination of its U.S. federal tax 
return for years prior to 2011. The open years contain matters that 
could be subject to differing interpretations of applicable tax laws 
and regulations related to the amount and/or timing of income, 
deductions and tax credits. Although the outcome of tax audits is 
always uncertain, the company believes that adequate amounts of 
tax and interest have been provided for any significant adjustments 
that are expected to result for these years.
	
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company received a draft tax 
assessment notice for approximately $866 million (approximately 
$850 million at 2014 year-end currency rates) from the Indian Tax 
Authorities for 2009. The company believes it will prevail on these 
matters and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator of liabil-
ity. At December 31, 2014, the company has recorded $471 million 
as prepaid income taxes in India. A significant portion of this bal-
ance represents cash tax deposits paid over time to protect the 
company’s right to appeal various income tax assessments made 
by the Indian Tax Authorities.
	
In the first quarter of 2014, the IRS commenced its audit of 
the company’s U.S. tax returns for 2011 and 2012. The company 
anticipates that this audit will be completed by the end of 2015.
	
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $61.4 billion 
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31, 
2014, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these 
earnings in non-U.S. operations. However, the company periodi-
cally repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that it 
does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the 
deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested 
earnings is not practicable.


===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
127
NOTE O.  
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING
RD&E expense was $5,437 million in 2014, $5,743 million in 2013 
and $5,816 million in 2012. In addition, RD&E expense included in 
discontinued operations was $368 million in 2014, $483 million in 
2013 and $486 million in 2012.
	
The company incurred total expense of $5,595 million, $5,959 
million and $6,034 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively, for 
scientific research and the application of scientific advances to 
the development of new and improved products and their uses, 
as well as services and their application. Within these amounts, 
software-related expense was $3,064 million, $3,077 million and 
$3,078 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. 
	
Expense for product-related engineering was $211 million, $267 
million and $268 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
NOTE P.  
EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based
Basic
1,004,272,584
1,094,486,604
1,142,508,521
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans
4,332,155
6,751,240
10,868,426
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares
1,395,741
1,804,313
2,072,370
Assuming dilution
1,010,000,480
1,103,042,156
1,155,449,317
Income from continuing operations
$15,751
$16,881
$16,999
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
(3,729)
(398)
(395)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated
$12,022
$16,483
$16,604
Income from continuing operations
$15,751
$16,881
$16,999
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares
(3)
(1)
(1)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings per share is calculated
$15,749
$16,880 
$16,998 
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which basic and diluted earnings  
per share is calculated
(3,729)
(398 )
(395 )
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated
$12,020
$16,483 
$16,603 
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations
$  15.59
$  15.30
$  14.71
Discontinued operations
(3.69)
(0.36)
(0.34)
Total
$  11.90
$  14.94
$  14.37
Basic
Continuing operations
$  15.68
$  15.42
$  14.88
Discontinued operations
(3.71)
(0.36)
(0.35)
Total
$  11.97
$  15.06
$  14.53
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 17,420 common shares in 2014 and 8,797 common shares in 2013 were outstanding, but 
were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the exercise price of the options was greater than the average 
market price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the effect would have been antidilutive. There were no stock options 
outstanding in 2012 that were considered antidilutive and not included in the diluted earnings per share calculation.


===== PAGE 129 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
128
NOTE Q.  
RENTAL EXPENSE AND LEASE COMMITMENTS
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and 
fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was 
$1,592 million in 2014, $1,759 million in 2013 and $1,767 million in 
2012. Within these amounts, rental expense reflected in discon-
tinued operations was $95 million, $115 million and $110 million, in 
2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Rental expense in agreements 
with rent holidays and scheduled rent increases is recorded on 
a straight-line basis over the lease term. Contingent rentals are 
included in the determination of rental expense as accruable. 
The table below depicts gross minimum rental commitments 
under noncancelable leases, amounts related to vacant space 
associated with infrastructure reductions, sublease income com-
mitments and capital lease commitments. These amounts reflect 
activities primarily related to office space, as well as datacenters.
($ in millions)
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Beyond 2019
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments  
(including vacant space below)
$1,350
$1,161
$988
$848
$754
$1,051
Vacant space
$     24
$       9
$    6
$    2
$    0
$      —
Sublease income commitments
$     12
$     10
$    8
$    6
$    5
$       6
Capital lease commitments
$     13
$       7
$    2
$    2
$    2
$       2
Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under 
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the 
“Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen-
sation and Management Resources Committee of the Board of 
Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans 
principally include restricted stock units, performance share units, 
stock options or any combination thereof.
	
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under 
the company’s existing Plans was 274 million at December 31, 
2014. In addition, certain incentive awards granted under previ-
ous plans, if and when those awards were canceled, could be 
reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million 
additional awards were considered authorized to be issued under 
the company’s existing Plans as of December 31, 2014. There were 
115.5 million unused shares available to be granted under the Plans 
as of December 31, 2014.
	
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all 
awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards 
approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, the 
number of options or the value of the award, the exercise price or 
formula for determining the exercise price and the date of grant. 
All awards for senior management are approved by the Commit-
tee. All awards for employees other than senior management are 
approved by senior management pursuant to a series of delega-
tions that were approved by the Committee, and the grants made 
pursuant to these delegations are reviewed periodically with the 
Committee. Awards that are given as part of annual total compen-
sation for senior management and other employees are made on 
NOTE R.  
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
The following table presents total stock-based compensation cost 
included in income from continuing operations:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
Cost
$ 121
$ 122
$ 132
Selling, general and administrative
350
435
498
Research, development  
and engineering
54
57
59
Other (income) and expense*
(13)
— 
(1)
Pre-tax stock-based  
compensation cost
512
614
688
Income tax benefits
(174)
(213)
(240)
Net stock-based  
compensation cost
$ 338
$ 402
$ 448
* Reflects the one-time effects related to the divestitures of the customer care and 
industry standard server businesses in 2014.
The amount of stock-based compensation cost included in dis-
continued operations, net of tax, was immaterial in all periods.
	
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested 
awards at December 31, 2014 and 2013 was $874 million and $995 
million, respectively. The amount at December 31, 2014 is expected 
to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately 
2.5 years.
	
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensa-
tion cost at December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.


===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
129
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.
RSUs
2014
2013
2012
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$166 
8,635,317
$148 
9,841,461
$129 
12,218,601
RSUs granted
172
2,525,947
189
2,541,081
184
2,635,772
RSUs released
157
(2,401,761)
131
(2,952,363)
117
(4,338,787)
RSUs canceled/forfeited
167
(1,025,226)
154
(794,862)
139
(674,125)
Balance at December 31
$171
7,734,277
$166 
8,635,317
$148 
9,841,461
PSUs
2014
2013
2012
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$178
2,824,294
$151 
3,172,201
$122 
3,686,991
PSUs granted at target
180
1,430,098
195
869,875
185
1,004,003
Additional shares earned above target*
157
29,960
118
152,069
102
550,399
PSUs released
157
(1,027,181)
118
(1,321,784)
102
(1,998,746)
PSUs canceled/forfeited
187
(116,464)
170
(48,067)
131
(70,446)
Balance at December 31**
$185
3,140,707
$178 
2,824,294
$151 
3,172,201
  * Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued will depend on final 
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the 
holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically 
over a one- to five-year period. For RSUs, dividend equivalents 
are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs is determined and fixed 
on the grant date based on the company’s stock price adjusted 
for the exclusion of dividend equivalents.
	
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at 
December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 is the same as the period over 
which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, which 
is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted during 
the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $434 mil-
lion, $481 million and $486 million, respectively. The total fair value 
of RSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31, 
2014, 2013 and 2012 was $378 million, $386 million and $509 mil-
lion, respectively. As of December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, there 
was $754 million, $871 million and $938 million, respectively, of 
unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The 
company received no cash from employees as a result of employee 
vesting and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31, 
2014, 2013 and 2012. In the second quarter of 2011, the company 
granted equity awards valued at approximately $1 thousand each 
to about 400,000 non-executive employees. These awards were 
made under the Plans and vest in December 2015.
specific cycle dates scheduled in advance. With respect to awards 
given in connection with promotions or new hires, the company’s 
policy requires approval of such awards prior to the grant date, 
which is typically the date of the promotion or the date of hire.
Stock Awards
Stock awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock Units 
(RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or 
Performance Share Units (PSUs). 


===== PAGE 131 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
130
	
PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ulti-
mately received by the employee depends on the company’s 
performance against specified targets and typically vest over a 
three-year period. For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not paid. 
The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date, based 
on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of divi-
dend equivalents, and assumes that performance targets will be 
achieved. Over the performance period, the number of shares of 
stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or downward based 
upon the probability of achievement of performance targets. The 
ultimate number of shares issued and the related compensation 
cost recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the 
final performance metrics to the specified targets. The fair value 
of PSUs granted at target during the years ended December 31, 
2014, 2013 and 2012 was $257 million, $170 million and $186 million, 
respectively. Total fair value of PSUs vested and released during 
the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $161 mil-
lion, $156 million and $203 million, respectively. 
	
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the 
tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended Decem-
ber 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 were $222 million, $312 million and 
$454 million, respectively.
Stock Options
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase 
shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are 
granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high 
and low stock price on the date of grant. These awards, which 
generally vest 25 percent per year, are fully vested four years from 
the date of grant and have a contractual term of 10 years.
	
The company estimates the fair value of stock options at 
the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key 
inputs and assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock 
options include the grant price of the award, the expected option 
term, volatility of the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the 
company’s dividend yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended 
to predict actual future events or the value ultimately realized by 
employees who receive equity awards, and subsequent events 
are not indicative of the reasonableness of the original estimates 
of fair value made by the company.
	
During the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, the 
company did not grant stock options.
	
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans 
during the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.
2014
2013
2012
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Balance at January 1
$97
5,622,951
$94
11,389,721
$90 
20,662,322
Options exercised
97
(3,740,252)
90
(5,585,127)
86
(9,080,170)
Options canceled/expired 
95
(131,750)
86
(181,643)
75
(192,431)
Balance at December 31
$97
1,750,949
$97
5,622,951
$94
11,389,721
Exercisable at December 31
$97
1,750,949
$97
5,622,951
$94
11,389,721
The shares under option at December 31, 2014 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Exercise Price Range
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value
Weighted-Average 
Remaining 
Contractual Life 
(in Years)
$85 and under
$  83
351,690
$  27,409,244
1.2
$86 and over
100
1,399,259
84,243,181
0.7
$  97
1,750,949
$111,652,425
0.8
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years 
ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $323 million, $614 
million and $1,005 million, respectively. The total cash received 
from employees as a result of employee stock option exercises for 
the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was approxi-
mately $364 million, $505 million and $785 million, respectively. 
In connection with these exercises, the tax benefits realized by 
the company for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 
2012 were $107 million, $199 million and $341 million, respectively.
	
The company settles employee stock option exercises pri-
marily with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with 
treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 
2014 and 2013 were approximately 1,225 million and 1,153 million 
shares, respectively.


===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
131
Acquisitions
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was 
an additional 0.5 million shares of stock-based awards, consist-
ing of stock options and restricted stock units, outstanding at 
December 31, 2014, as a result of the company’s assumption of 
stock-based awards previously granted by the acquired entities. 
The weighted-average exercise price of these awards was $56 
per share.
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock 
Purchase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants 
to purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a 
5-percent discount off the average market price on the day of 
purchase through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible 
compensation. Eligible compensation includes any compensation 
received by the employee during the year. The ESPP provides 
for offering periods during which shares may be purchased and 
continues as long as shares remain available under the ESPP, 
unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Direc-
tors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted from purchasing 
more than $25,000 of common stock in one calendar year or 1,000 
shares in an offering period.
	
Employees purchased 1.3 million, 1.5 million and 1.6 million 
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 
2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Cash dividends declared and 
paid by the company on its common stock also include cash 
dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP. 
Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can be rein-
vested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is 
considered outstanding and is included in the weighted-average 
outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted 
earnings per share.
	
In July 2014, the “2014 ESPP Reserve” became effective and 
25 million additional shares of authorized common stock were 
reserved and approved for issuance. The 2014 ESPP provides for 
semi-annual offerings commencing July 1, 2014, and continuing as 
long as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless terminated 
earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
	
Approximately 24.4 million, 2.3 million and 3.8 million shares 
were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2014, 
2013 and 2012, respectively. 
NOTE S.  
RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined con-
tribution plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a 
supplemental retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans primarily consist-
ing of retiree medical and dental benefits for eligible retirees 
and dependents. 
U.S. Plans
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
IBM Personal Pension Plan 
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired 
prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pen-
sion benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008, the 
IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qualified) 
plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective January 
1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess Personal 
Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is now referred 
to as the Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now referred to as 
the PPP. The Qualified PPP is funded by company contributions 
to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of 
participants and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded, 
provides benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans.
	
Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using 
benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first 
method uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines benefits 
based on salary, years of service, mortality and other participant-
specific factors. The second method is a cash balance formula 
that calculates benefits using a percentage of employees’ annual 
salary, as well as an interest crediting rate.
	
Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased 
December 31, 2007 for all participants. 
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental 
Executive Retention Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan, 
which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives 
based on average earnings, years of service and age at termina-
tion of employment.
	
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 
31, 2007 for all participants. 
Defined Contribution Plans
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan 
U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to par-
ticipate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined 
contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue 
Code. Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, 
eligible employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their con-
tributions up to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those hired 
prior to January 1, 2005, and, generally up to 5 percent of eligible 
compensation for those hired on or after January 1, 2005. In addi-
tion, eligible employees receive automatic contributions from the 
company equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent of eligible compensation based 
on their eligibility to participate in the PPP as of December 31, 
2007. Employees generally receive automatic contributions and 
matching contributions after the completion of one year of service. 
Further, through June 30, 2009, IBM contributed transition credits 
to eligible participants’ 401(k) Plus Plan accounts. The amount of 
the transition credits was based on a participant’s age and service 
as of June 30, 1999.


===== PAGE 133 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
132
	
The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and 
participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All 
contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and 
invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections. 
There are no minimum amounts that must be invested in com-
pany stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts 
out of company stock to another investment choice, other than 
excessive trading rules applicable to such investments. Effective 
January 1, 2013, matching and automatic contributions are made 
once annually at the end of the year. In order to receive such con-
tributions each year, a participant must be employed on December 
15 of the plan year. However, if a participant separates from service 
prior to December 15, and has completed certain service and/or 
age requirements, then the participant will be eligible to receive 
such matching and automatic contributions following separation 
from service.
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Execu-
tive Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, 
defined contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 
(Excess 401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution 
plan. Employees whose eligible compensation is expected to 
exceed the IRS compensation limit for qualified plans are eligible 
to participate in the Excess 401(k). The purpose of the Excess 
401(k) is to provide benefits that would be provided under the quali-
fied IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if the compensation limits did not apply.
	
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping 
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. 
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts 
in investments which mirror the primary investment options avail-
able under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess 401(k) 
are also eligible to receive company match and automatic contribu-
tions on eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and 
on compensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code 
pay limit once they have completed one year of service. Through 
June 30, 2009, eligible participants also received transition cred-
its. Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company 
contributions are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated State-
ment of Financial Position. Effective January 1, 2013, matching and 
automatic contributions are recorded once annually at the end of 
the year. In order to receive such contributions each year, a partici-
pant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year. However, 
if a participant separates from service prior to December 15, and 
has completed certain service and/or age requirements, then the 
participant will be eligible to receive such matching and automatic 
contributions following separation from service. 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan 
The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretire-
ment benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to 
eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insur-
ance for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company 
established a Future Health Account (FHA) for employees who 
were more than five years from retirement eligibility. Employees 
who were within five years of retirement eligibility are covered 
under the company’s prior retiree health benefits arrangements. 
Under either the FHA or the prior retiree health benefit arrange-
ments, there is a maximum cost to the company for retiree health 
benefits. Effective January 1, 2014, the company amended the plan 
to establish a Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) for each 
Medicare-eligible plan retiree, surviving spouse and long-term 
disability plan participant who is eligible for company-subsidized 
coverage and who enrolls in an individual plan under the Medi-
care Exchange. The company also amended its life insurance plan. 
Employees retiring on or after January 1, 2015 are not eligible for 
life insurance.
	
Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are 
not eligible for company-subsidized nonpension postretirement 
benefits.
Non-U.S. Plans
Certain subsidiaries and branches outside the United States spon-
sor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover 
substantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds 
under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annui-
ties under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. 
Benefits under the defined benefit plans are typically based either 
on years of service and the employee’s compensation (generally 
during a fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or 
on annual credits. The range of assumptions that are used for 
the non-U.S. defined benefit plans reflect the different economic 
environments within the various countries.
	
In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries 
sponsor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide 
medical and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible 
dependents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S. 
retirees. However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local 
government-sponsored and -administered programs.


===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
133
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. 
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
Total
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
Defined benefit pension plans
$(833)
$(223)
$(526)
$1,267
$1,396
$1,040
$   434
$1,173
$   515
Retention Plan
15
21
18
—
—
—
15
21
18
Total defined benefit pension plans  
(income)/cost
$(818)
$(202)
$(507)
$1,267
$1,396
$1,040
$   449
$1,195
$   533
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and non-U.S. plans
$ 713
$ 785
$ 857
$   526
$   575
$   621
$1,239 
$1,361 
$1,478 
Excess 401(k)
14
24
29
—
—
—
14
24
29
Total defined contribution plans cost
$ 727
$ 809
$ 885
$   526
$   575
$   621
$1,253 
$1,384 
$1,506 
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans cost
$ 206
$ 218
$ 268
$     66
$     79
$     82
$   272
$   298
$   350
Total retirement-related  
benefits net periodic cost
$ 115
$ 826
$ 646
$1,859 
$2,051 
$1,743 
$1,974 
$2,876 
$2,389 
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement benefit 
plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations
Fair Value of Plan Assets
Funded Status*
At December 31:
2014
2013
2014
2013
2014
2013
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP
$54,708
$49,315
$55,772
$53,954
$   1,065
$   4,639
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP
$  1,602
$  1,425
$        —
$        —
  $  (1,602)
$  (1,425)
Retention Plan
334
294
—
—
(334)
(294)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan
5,053
4,633
16
177
(5,037)
(4,456)
Total underfunded U.S. plans
$  6,989 
$  6,352
$       16 
$     177
$  (6,973)
$  (6,175)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans 
Qualified defined benefit pension plans
$16,794 
$  9,336 
$17,888 
$10,240 
$   1,094
$      904
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
11
10
11
11
0
1
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans
$16,804 
$  9,346 
$17,898 
$10,251 
$   1,094
$      905
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans
$26,278 
$32,697 
$21,655 
$29,223 
$  (4,623)
$  (3,474)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans
6,762
6,587
—
—
(6,762)
(6,587)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
806 
822 
73 
81 
(733)
(741)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans
$33,846 
$40,106 
$21,729 
$29,304 
$(12,118)
$(10,802)
Total overfunded plans
$71,512 
$58,661 
$73,671 
$64,205 
$   2,159
$   5,544
Total underfunded plans
$40,836 
$46,458 
$21,745 
$29,481 
$(19,091)
$(16,977)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation and 
benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2014, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 97 percent funded compared to the benefit 
obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 102 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the company’s defined benefit pension 
plans worldwide were 90 percent funded.


===== PAGE 135 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
134
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
Service cost
$       —
$       —
$       —
$    449
$    501
$    443
Interest cost
2,211
1,980
2,196
1,533
1,524
1,779
Expected return on plan assets
(4,096)
(3,981)
(4,043)
(2,247)
(2,195)
(2,303)
Amortization of transition assets
—
—
—
0
0
0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
10
10
10
(111)
(119)
(154)
Recognized actuarial losses
1,056
1,790
1,331
1,400
1,600
1,027
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
—
26
0
0
Multi-employer plans/other costs*
—
—
—
217
85
247
Total net periodic (income)/cost
$   (818)
$   (202)
$   (507)
$ 1,267
$ 1,396
$ 1,040
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
Service cost
$  26
$  35
$  36
$  7 
$10
$14
Interest cost
187
164
200
63
60
64
Expected return on plan assets
0
(1)
—
(9)
(9)
(9)
Amortization of transition assets
—
—
—
0
0
0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
(7)
—
—
(5)
(5)
(4)
Recognized actuarial losses
0
21
32
11
23
17
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
—
0
0
0
Total net periodic cost
$206 
$218 
$268 
$66 
$79 
$82
* The 2014 Non-U.S. plans amount includes $148 million related to the IBM Spain pension litigation and the 2012 Non-U.S. plans amount includes $162 million related to the IBM UK 
pension litigation. See page 136 for additional information.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement 
Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 136 represent financial informa-
tion for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding 
defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans 
under U.S. Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP 
and the Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the 
nonpension postretirement benefit plans under Non-U.S. Plans 
consists of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The 
nonpension postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists 
of only the U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
	
The tables below present the components of net periodic 
(income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined con-
tribution plans.


===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
135
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, exclud-
ing defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2014
2013
2014
2013
2014
2013
2014
2013
Change in benefit obligation 
Benefit obligation at January 1
$51,034
$56,810 
$ 48,620
$49,319 
$ 4,633
$ 5,282
$ 832
$1,019
Service cost
—
—
449
501
26
35
7
10
Interest cost
2,211
1,980
1,533
1,524
187
164
63
60
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
37
42
61
191
—
—
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
—
—
(90)
89
0
(2)
0
0
Actuarial losses/(gains)
6,968
(4,344)
6,662
(362)
548
(481)
38
(89)
Benefits paid from trust
(3,455)
(3,303)
(1,985)
(1,920)
(388)
(557)
(5)
(6)
Direct benefit payments
(114)
(108)
(465)
(464)
(37)
(43)
(26)
(28)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
(5,073)
(115)
—
—
(91)
(89)
Medicare/Government subsidies
—
—
—
—
23
30
—
—
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other
—
—
146
6
0
15
(1)
(44)
Benefit obligation at December 31
$56,643
$51,034 
$ 49,834
$48,620 
$ 5,053
$ 4,633
$ 817
$   832
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1
$53,954
$53,630 
$ 39,464
$38,058 
$    177
$    433
$   92
$   119
Actual return on plan assets
5,274
3,626
5,579
2,515
0
0
9
5
Employer contributions
—
—
465
449
166
110
0
0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
—
—
(59)
35
0
—
0
0
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
37
42
61
191
—
—
Benefits paid from trust
(3,455)
(3,303)
(1,985)
(1,920)
(388)
(557)
(5)
(6)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
(4,049)
121
—
—
(11)
(14)
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other
—
—
93*
164*
—
—
0
(12)
Fair value of plan assets at December 31
$55,772
$53,954 
$ 39,543
$39,464 
$      16
$    177
$   84
$     92
Funded status at December 31
$    (871)
$  2,920
$(10,291)
$ (9,157)
$(5,037)
$(4,456)
$(733)
$  (740)
Accumulated benefit obligation**
$56,643
$51,034 
$ 47,516
$47,806
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
  * Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to government rulings in 2011 and 2013 allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM. The 
assets will be returned to IBM monthly over a three-year period, starting June 2011 and September 2013 respectively, with approximately $122 million returned during 2014. The 
remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31, 2014 remains excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31:
2014
2013
2014
2013
2014
2013
2014
2013
Prepaid pension assets
$ 1,065
$ 4,639
$   1,095
$    912
$        0
$        0
$     0
$     1
Current liabilities—compensation and benefits
(111)
(107)
(326)
(364)
(381)
(256)
(13)
(16)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension 
postretirement benefit obligations
(1,825)
(1,612)
(11,060)
(9,705)
(4,656)
(4,200)
(720)
(725)
Funded status—net
$   (871)
$ 2,920
$(10,291)
$(9,157)
$(5,037)
$(4,456)
$(733)
$(740)


===== PAGE 137 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
136
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI and 
the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the retirement-
related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2014
2013
2014
2013
2014
2013
2014
2013
Net loss at January 1
$13,709
$19,488 
$19,777
$22,188 
$304
$806 
$161
$269 
Current period loss/(gain)
5,789
(3,989)
3,324
(814)
548
(480)
38
(85)
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
(25)
3
—
—
1
0
Amortization of net loss included  
in net periodic (income)/cost
(1,056)
(1,790)
(1,400)
(1,600)
0
(21)
(11)
(23)
Net loss at December 31
$18,442
$13,709 
$21,676
$19,777 
$852
$304 
$189
$161 
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1
$     120
$     130
$    (496)
$    (614)
$  15
$   —
$ (32)
$   (6)
Current period prior service costs/(credits)
—
—
(1)
0
—
15
0
(31)
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits  
included in net periodic (income)/cost
(10)
(10)
111
119
7
—
5
5
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31
$     110
$     120
$    (386)
$    (496)
$  23
$  15
$ (26)
$ (32)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1
$       —
$        —
$         0
$         0
$   —
$   —
$    0
$    0
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)  
included in net periodic (income)/cost
—
—
0
0
—
—
0
0
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31
$       —
$        —
$         0
$         0
$   —
$   —
$    0
$    0
Total loss recognized in accumulated other 
comprehensive income/(loss)*
$18,552
$13,829 
$21,290
$19,281 
$875
$319
$163
$129 
* See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 118 through 121 for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net periodic 
(income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2015.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit  
Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss
$1,659 
$1,693 
$43
$11
Prior service costs/(credits)
10
(98)
(7)
(5)
Transition (assets)/liabilities
—
—
—
—
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the company amended 
the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan. A plan amend-
ment effective January 1, 2014, which established an HRA for 
Medicare eligible participants increased the benefit obligation $91 
million. A plan amendment which ended life insurance eligibility 
for employees who retire on or after January 1, 2015 reduced the 
benefit obligation $76 million.
	
On March 24, 2014, the Supreme Court of Spain issued a ruling 
against IBM Spain in litigation involving its defined benefit and 
defined contribution plans. As a result of the ruling, the company 
recorded a pre-tax retirement-related obligation of $148 mil-
lion in 2014 in selling, general and administrative expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. This obligation is reflected in 
“Non-U.S. Plans—Multi-employer plans/other costs” in the table 
on page 134. To date, the rulings in this case are declaratory only.
	
In 2012, the High Court in London issued a ruling against IBM 
United Kingdom Limited and IBM United Kingdom Holdings Lim-
ited, both wholly owned subsidiaries of the company, in litigation 
involving one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a result of the 
ruling, the company recorded an additional pre-tax retirement-
related obligation of $162 million in 2012 in selling, general and 
administrative expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
See note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on page 123 for 
additional information regarding pension plan litigation matters. 


===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
137
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net 
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate
4.50%
3.60%
4.20%
3.32%
3.23%
4.28%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets
8.00%
8.00%
8.00%
6.08%
6.21%
6.26%
Rate of compensation increase
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.52%
2.51%
2.43%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure  
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate
3.70%
4.50%
3.60%
2.34%
3.32%
3.23%
Rate of compensation increase
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.49%
2.52%
2.51%
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2014
2013
2012
2014
2013
2012
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net 
periodic cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate
4.10%
3.30%
3.90%
7.78%
6.43%
7.37%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets
N/A
0.35%
N/A
10.22%
9.01%
9.01%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure  
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate
3.40%
4.10%
3.30%
7.51%
7.78%
6.43%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related benefit 
plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, fixed-
income debt instruments at the measurement date. For the U.S. 
and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate 
bonds is used to construct a yield curve. The cash flows from 
the company’s expected benefit obligation payments are then 
matched to the yield curve to derive the discount rates. In other 
non-U.S. countries, where the markets for high-quality long-term 
bonds are not generally as well developed, a portfolio of long-term 
government bonds is used as a base, to which a credit spread is 
added to simulate corporate bond yields at these maturities in 
the jurisdiction of each plan, as the benchmark for developing the 
respective discount rates.
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the 
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/
cost and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assump-
tions resulted in an increase in 2014 net periodic income of $275 
million, a decrease in 2013 net periodic income of $162 million 
and a decrease in 2012 net periodic income of $258 million. The 
changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase 
in the PBO of $4,437 million and a decrease of $4,785 million at 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
	
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the 
changes in the discount rate assumptions had no material 
impact on net periodic cost for the years ended December 31, 
2014, 2013 and 2012 and resulted in an increase in the APBO of 
$256 million and a decrease of $298 million at December 31, 2014 
and 2013, respectively. 
	
For all of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, the 
changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase 
in the benefit obligations of approximately $11.0 billion at Decem-
ber 31, 2014.
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net 
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations 
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years 
of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of 
which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan 
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and 
mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a 
minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
	
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure 
the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations 
for retirement-related benefit plans.


===== PAGE 139 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
138
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic 
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan 
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan 
assets. Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into 
account long-term expectations for future returns and the invest-
ment policies and strategies as described on page 139. These 
rates of return are developed by the company and are tested for 
reasonableness against historical returns. The use of expected 
long-term returns on plan assets may result in recognized pen-
sion income that is greater or less than the actual returns of those 
plan assets in any given year. Over time, however, the expected 
long-term returns are designed to approximate the actual long-
term returns, and therefore result in a pattern of income and cost 
recognition that more closely matches the pattern of the services 
provided by the employees. Differences between actual and 
expected returns are recognized as a component of net loss or 
gain in AOCI, which is amortized as a component of net periodic 
(income)/cost over the service lives or life expectancy of the plan 
participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts 
exceed certain thresholds provided by accounting standards. The 
market-related value of plan assets recognizes changes in the fair 
value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the 
expected return on plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost.
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the Qualified PPP, the 
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent 
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 
and 2012 and, consequently, had no incremental impact on net 
periodic (income)/cost. For 2015, the projected long-term rate of 
return on plan assets is approximately 7.5 percent.
	
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company 
maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely pay-
ments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 
2014, 2013 and 2012, the expected long-term return on plan assets 
and the actual return on those assets were not material.
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com-
pany, based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate 
of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined 
benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 
2007 for all participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on 
life expectancy and death rates for different types of participants. 
Mortality rates are periodically updated based on actual experi-
ence. In the U.S., the Society of Actuaries released new mortality 
tables in 2014 which the company utilized in its plan remeasure-
ments at December 31, 2014. For the U.S. retirement-related 
benefit plans, the change in mortality assumptions resulted in an 
increase to the benefit obligations of approximately $2.6 billion.
Interest Crediting Rate
Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a 
cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an 
interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/
cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting 
the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the ben-
efits that they are expected to receive in the following year and is 
based on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S. 
Treasury Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
	
For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.1 per-
cent for the year ended December 31, 2014, from 1.2 percent for the 
year ended December 31, 2013, resulted in an increase in 2014 net 
periodic income of $8 million. The change in the interest crediting 
rate to 1.2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2013, from 
1.1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2012, resulted in a 
decrease in 2013 net periodic income of $6 million. The change in 
the interest crediting rate to 1.1 percent for the year ended Decem-
ber 31, 2012, from 1.3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2011, 
resulted in an increase in 2012 net periodic income of $10 million.
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the 
company reviews external data and its own historical trends for 
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. 
However, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect 
on plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan 
which limit the company’s obligation to the participants. The com-
pany assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2015 will be 
7 percent. In addition, the company assumes that the same trend 
rate will decrease to 5 percent over the next four years. A one 
percentage point increase or decrease in the assumed health-
care cost trend rate would not have had a material effect on 2014, 
2013 and 2012 net periodic cost or the benefit obligations as of 
December 31, 2014 and 2013.
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and mea-
sured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuations, 
these fair value measurements may not necessarily reflect the 
amounts the company could realize in current market transactions. 


===== PAGE 140 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
139
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are 
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet 
its future obligations. The precise amount for which these obli-
gations will be settled depends on future events, including the 
retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. 
The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based 
on the current economic environment and other pertinent factors 
described on pages 137 through 138. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s 
investment strategy balances the requirement to generate returns, 
using potentially higher yielding assets such as equity securi-
ties, with the need to control risk in the portfolio with less volatile 
assets, such as fixed-income securities. Risks include, among 
others, inflation, volatility in equity values and changes in interest 
rates that could cause the plan to become underfunded, thereby 
increasing its dependence on contributions from the company. To 
mitigate any potential concentration risk, careful consideration is 
given to balancing the portfolio among industry sectors, compa-
nies and geographies, taking into account interest rate sensitivity, 
dependence on economic growth, currency and other factors 
that affect investment returns. In 2014, the company changed its 
investment strategy, modifying the target asset allocation, primarily 
by reducing equity securities and increasing debt securities. This 
change was designed to reduce the potential negative impact that 
equity markets might have on the funded status of the plan. As a 
result, the Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 33 percent 
equity securities, 57 percent fixed-income securities, 5 percent 
real estate and 5 percent other investments.
 	
The assets are managed by professional investment firms 
and investment professionals who are employees of the com-
pany. They are bound by investment mandates determined by 
the company’s management and are measured against specific 
benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given, but 
not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer concentra-
tion, investment style and reliance on particular active and passive 
investment strategies.
	
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $6,229 million 
of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private market assets 
consisting of private equities and private real estate investments, 
which are less liquid than publicly traded securities. As of Decem-
ber 31, 2014, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,629 million in 
commitments for future investments in private markets to be made 
over a number of years. These commitments are expected to be 
funded from plan assets.
	
Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve 
investment objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk 
management strategy. The primary reasons for the use of deriva-
tives are fixed income management, including duration, interest 
rate management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to 
manage currency and commodity strategies.
	
Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those 
described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted-aver-
age target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 32 percent equity 
securities, 56 percent fixed-income securities, 2 percent real 
estate and 10 percent other investments, which is consistent with 
the allocation decisions made by the company’s management. 
The table on page 140 details the actual equity, fixed income, 
real estate and other types of investments for non-U.S. plans. In 
some countries, a higher percentage allocation to fixed income 
is required to manage solvency and funding risks. In others, the 
responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with a 
board that may include up to 50 percent of members elected 
by employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences 
compared with the strategies previously described. Generally, 
these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid assets and their use 
of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan and mainly for cur-
rency hedging, interest rate risk management, credit exposure 
and alternative investment strategies.
	
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are 
underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company main-
tains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely 
benefit payments. 


===== PAGE 141 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
140
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 
2014. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (a)
$11,527
$         1
$      —
$11,528
$5,652
$        —
$      —
$  5,652
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c)
85
2,277
—
2,362
126
7,415
—
7,540
Fixed income
Government and related (d)
—
7,883
—
7,883
—
8,159
32
8,191
Corporate bonds (e)
—
18,828
4
18,832
—
2,063
1
2,063
Mortgage and asset-backed securities
—
567
20
587
—
238
—
238
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f)
312
3,118
295
3,725
87
9,715
—
9,802
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
1,053
—
1,053
Cash and short-term investments (g)
345
2,304
—
2,650
158
393
—
551
Hedge funds
—
1,474
889
2,362
—
745
—
745
Private equity (h)
—
—
3,287
3,287
—
—
513
513
Private real estate (h)
—
—
2,942
2,942
—
—
664
664
Derivatives (i)
(55)
3
—
(53)
2
846
—
848
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j)
—
—
—
—
33
1,513
220
1,766
Subtotal
12,214
36,455
7,437
56,106
6,056
32,139
1,429
39,625
Other (k)
—
—
—
(333)
—
—
—
(82)
Fair value of plan assets
$12,214
$36,455
$7,437
$55,772
$6,056
$32,139
$1,429
 
$39,543
(a)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $55 million, representing 0.1 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include 
IBM common stock of $21 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b)	Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e)	The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $10 million, representing 0.02 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $4 million 
representing 0.01 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f)	 Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(g)	Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h)	Primarily includes limited partnerships.
(i)	 Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(j)	 Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities. 
(k)	Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $16 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hier-
archy. The Non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $84 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico 
and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 
in the fair value hierarchy.


===== PAGE 142 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
141
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 
2013. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (a)
$15,929 
$        —
$      —
$15,929 
$6,489 
$        —
$      —
$  6,489
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c)
216
2,593
—
2,809
132
8,325
—
8,457
Fixed income
Government and related (d)
—
7,093
1
7,094
—
8,682
42
8,724
Corporate bonds (e)
—
14,639
5
14,644
—
1,881
4
1,885
Mortgage and asset-backed securities
—
691
19
709
—
8
—
8
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f)
221
716
274
1,211
75
8,596
—
8,670
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
1,196
—
1,196
Cash and short-term investments (g)
427
1,915
—
2,343
154
451
—
605
Hedge funds
—
1,368
860
2,228
—
740
—
740
Private equity (h)
—
—
3,771
3,771
—
—
410
410
Private real estate (h)
—
—
3,038
3,038
—
—
655
655
Derivatives (i)
1
6
—
7
1
150
—
151
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j)
—
—
—
—
36
1,518
—
1,554
Subtotal
16,795
29,021
7,968
53,784
6,886
31,547
1,110
39,544
Other (k)
—
—
—
170
—
—
—
(80)
Fair value of plan assets
$16,795 
$29,021 
$7,968 
$53,954 
$6,886 
$31,547 
$1,110 
$39,464 
(a)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $83 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include 
IBM common stock of $31 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b)	Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e)	The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $9 million, representing 0.02 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $1 million 
representing 0.001 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f)	 Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(g)	Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h)	Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i)	 Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(j)	 Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities. 
(k)	Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $177 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value 
hierarchy. The Non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $92 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico 
and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 
in the fair value hierarchy.


===== PAGE 143 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
142
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 
2014 and 2013 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Mortgage 
and Asset-
Backed 
Securities
Fixed Income 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Hedge 
Funds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2014
$  1
$ 5
$19
$274
$860
$3,771
$3,038
$ 7,968
Return on assets held at end of year
—
0
0
21
28
(10)
197
238
Return on assets sold during the year
—
0
0
—
—
332
199
531
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
—
0
(3)
—
—
(807)
(492)
(1,302)
Transfers, net
(1)
(1)
4
—
—
—
—
2
Balance at December 31, 2014
$ —
$ 4
$20
$295
$889
$3,287
$2,942
$ 7,437
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Mortgage 
and Asset-
Backed 
Securities
Fixed Income 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Hedge 
Funds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2013
$ 6
$11
$ 45
$267
$756
$4,085
$2,861
$ 8,032
Return on assets held at end of year
0
0
(1)
7
104
1,104
889
2,103
Return on assets sold during the year
0
0
0
—
0
(528)
(412)
(939)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
(5)
3
0
—
0
(891)
(301)
(1,194)
Transfers, net
0
(8)
(26)
—
—
—
—
(33)
Balance at December 31, 2013
$ 1
$  5
$ 19
$274
$860
$3,771
$3,038
$ 7,968
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 
2014 and 2013 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Other 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Total
Balance at January 1, 2014
$42
$ 4
$410
$655
$   —
$1,110
Return on assets held at end of year
3
0
26
83
26
138
Return on assets sold during the year
0
0
46
(12)
—
34
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
(8)
(3)
75
(13)
104
155
Transfers, net
—
—
0
—
102
102
Foreign exchange impact
(5)
0
(45)
(49)
(12)
(110)
Balance at December 31, 2014
$32
$ 1
$513 
$664
$220
$1,429
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2013
$ 76
$ 5
$353
$609
$1,042
Return on assets held at end of year
(12)
0
1
33
22
Return on assets sold during the year
1
0
18
(3)
16
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
(24)
(1)
26
1
1
Foreign exchange impact
2
0
12
15
29
Balance at December 31, 2013
$ 42
$ 4 
$410
$655
$1,110


===== PAGE 144 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
143
Valuation Techniques
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to 
measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valu-
ation techniques during 2014 and 2013.
	
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on 
the stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. 
IBM common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the 
New York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are 
typically valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the 
administrator of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV 
is based on the value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, 
minus liabilities and divided by the number of shares or units out-
standing. These assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 
depending on availability of quoted market prices.
	
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated 
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar char-
acteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified as 
Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price reported 
on the major market on which the individual securities are traded.
	
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their 
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. 
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities 
of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2.
	
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations 
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market 
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of 
such assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are 
reviewed periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to 
determine if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. 
These investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation meth-
odology is applied consistently from period to period.
	
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price 
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are 
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close 
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pric-
ing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, for 
example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and 
foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or 
Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices.
Expected Contributions
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions 
sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable 
employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the 
company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
	
The company contributed $465 million and $449 million in 
cash to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $54 million 
and $57 million in cash to non-U.S. multi-employer plans during 
the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The 
cash contributions to multi-employer plans represent the annual 
cost included in net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Con-
solidated Statement of Earnings. The company has no liability for 
participants in multi-employer plans other than its own employees. 
As a result, the company’s participation in multi-employer plans 
has no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
	
In 2015, the company is not legally required to make any con-
tributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However, 
depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company 
may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP 
during the year.
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law 
in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other 
provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain 
U.S. defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pen-
sion plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes 
and raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-
related benefit plans. The additional funding requirements by the 
Act apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act 
was updated by the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of 
2008, which revised the funding requirements in the Act by clarify-
ing that pension plans may smooth the value of pension plans over 
24 months. At December 31, 2014, no mandatory contribution was 
required for 2015.
	
In 2015, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S. 
defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately 
$600 million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined 
benefit pension plans in the UK, Japan and the Netherlands. This 
amount represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. 
Financial market performance in 2015 could increase the legally 
mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which require 
monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. The com-
pany could also elect to contribute more than the legally mandated 
amount based on market conditions or other factors.


===== PAGE 145 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
144
Defined Contribution Plans
The company contributed $1,239 million and $1,361 million in cash 
to the defined contribution plans during the years ended Decem-
ber 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In 2015, the company estimates 
cash contributions to the defined contribution plans to be approxi-
mately $1.2 billion.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The company contributed $144 million and $80 million to the 
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. These contribution 
($ in millions)
Qualified 
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Nonqualified 
U.S. Plans 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total 
Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2015
$  3,449
$113
$  1,849
$   348
$  5,758
2016
3,476
115
1,854
344
5,790
2017
3,492
117
1,880
348
5,837
2018
3,501
118
1,911
357
5,887
2019
3,458
120
1,949
374
5,901
2020–2024
17,566
607
10,290
2,060
30,523
The 2015 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (underfunded 
plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These payments 
have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2014.
($ in millions)
 
 U.S. Plan 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total 
Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2015
$   426
$  8
$  31
$   465
2016
405
8
35
448
2017
410
9
38
457
2018
412
9
41
463
2019
412
10
44
466
2020–2024
1,871
59
257
2,187
The 2015 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets 
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
amounts exclude the Medicare-related subsidy discussed on 
page 145.
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments 
to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments 
have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to 
measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2014 and include ben-
efits attributable to estimated future compensation increases, 
where applicable.


===== PAGE 146 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
145
Medicare Prescription Drug Act
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement 
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company qualified to receive 
a federal subsidy through 2013. Due to benefit plan changes effec-
tive January 1, 2014, the company did not qualify for the subsidy 
as of that date. The company received total subsidies of $23 mil-
lion and $30 million for prescription drug-related coverage during 
the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, which 
were utilized to reduce the company contributions to the U.S. 
nonpension postretirement benefit plan. The company is also 
expected to receive additional subsidies after 2014 to true up the 
final subsidy amount due to IBM under the Act.
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pen-
sion plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess 
of plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded 
status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the 
table on page 135.
($ in millions)
2014
2013
At December 31:
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets
$34,976 
$21,655
$41,003
$29,223
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets
33,148
20,680
40,315
29,213
Plans with assets in excess of PBO
71,501
73,660
58,651
64,194
NOTE T.  
SEGMENT INFORMATION
The company’s major operations consist of five business seg-
ments: Global Tech­nol­ogy Services, Global Business Services, 
Software, Systems and Technology and Global Financing. The 
segments represent components of the company for which 
separate financial information is available that is utilized on a 
regular basis by the chief executive officer in determining how 
to allocate resources and evaluate performance. The segments 
are determined based on several factors, including client base, 
homogeneity of products, technology, delivery channels and simi-
lar economic characteristics.
	
Information about each segment’s business and the products 
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located 
in the “Description of Business” section on pages 29 to 31, and 
in “Segment Details,” on pages 33 to 38 in the Management 
Discussion.
	
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions 
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, 
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that are used 
by Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements are 
primarily sourced internally from Systems and Technology and 
Software. For providing IT services that are used internally, Global 
Technology Services and Global Business Services recover 
cost, as well as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the 
arm’s-length value of providing the services. The Global Services 
segments enter into arm’s-length loans at prices equivalent to 
market rates with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of 
equipment used in services engagements. All internal transaction 
prices are reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
	
The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations 
to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a 
result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the 
segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain 
marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting, 
Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re­sources and Billing and 
Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based 
on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., head count. When a clear 
and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are 
allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the compa-
ny’s management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated 
based on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared 
expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to 
the segments. These expenses are associated with the elimination 
of internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.


===== PAGE 147 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
146
	
The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and mea-
surement system utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income from continuing operations. These 
results are used, in part, by senior management, both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments. 
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
For the year ended December 31:
Global 
Technology 
Services
Global 
Business 
Services
Software
Systems and 
Technology*
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments*
2014
External revenue
$37,130 
$17,825 
$25,434 
$  9,996
$2,034 
$  92,418 
Internal revenue
934
543
3,496
647
2,488
8,108
Total revenue
$38,063 
$18,367 
$28,931 
$10,643 
$4,522 
$100,527 
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
$  6,340
$  2,999
$10,699
$       34
$2,189 
$  22,262
Revenue year-to-year change
(3.9)%
(3.9)%
(0.7)%
(21.6)%
5.1%
(4.9)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
(9.2)%
(6.7)%
(3.7)%
(84.1)%
0.8%
(6.0)%
Pre-tax income margin
16.7%
16.3%
37.0%
0.3%
48.4%
22.1%
2013*
External revenue
$38,551 
$18,396 
$25,932 
$12,988
$2,022 
$  97,889 
Internal revenue
1,063
714
3,191
593
2,282
7,843
Total revenue
$39,615 
$19,109 
$29,123 
$13,581 
$4,304 
$105,732 
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
$  6,983
$  3,214
$11,106
$     213
$2,171 
$  23,687
Revenue year-to-year change
(4.3)%
(0.9)%
1.4%
(18.7)%
5.7%
(4.0)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
0.3%
7.7%
2.7%
(88.6)%
6.8%
(3.9)%
Pre-tax income margin
17.6%
16.8%
38.1%
1.6%
50.4%
22.4%
2012*
External revenue
$40,236 
$18,566 
$25,448 
$16,034
$2,013 
$102,297 
Internal revenue
1,166
719
3,274
676
2,060
7,896
Total revenue
$41,402 
$19,286 
$28,722 
$16,710 
$4,073 
$110,193 
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
$  6,961
$  2,983
$10,810
$  1,866
$2,034 
$  24,653
Revenue year-to-year change
(1.7)%
(4.0)%
1.8%
(7.0)%
(2.9)%
(2.1)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
10.8%
(0.8)%
8.4%
(11.6)%
1.1%
5.4%
Pre-tax income margin
16.8%
15.5%
37.6%
11.2%
49.9%
22.4%
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.


===== PAGE 148 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
147
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
Revenue
Total reportable segments
$100,527
$105,732 
$110,193 
Other revenue and adjustments
374
478
577
Elimination of internal transactions
(8,108)
(7,843)
(7,896)
Total IBM consolidated revenue
$  92,793
$  98,367
$102,874
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
Pre-tax income from 
continuing operations:
Total reportable segments
$22,262
$23,687 
$24,653 
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(791)
(758)
(703)
Acquisition-related charges
(12)
(46)
(36)
Non-operating retirement- 
related (costs)/income
(353)
(1,062)
(538)
Elimination of internal transactions
(1,914)
(1,480)
(1,197)
Unallocated corporate amounts**
795
(98)
361
Total income from continuing 
operations, before tax
$19,986
$20,244 
$22,540 
  * Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
**The 2014, 2013 and 2012 amounts include the gain related to the Retail Store Solutions 
divestiture. The 2014 amount also includes the net gain related to the industry stan-
dard server divestiture.
Immaterial Items
Investment in Equity Alliances and  
Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and 
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the seg-
ments did not have a material effect on the financial position or the 
financial results of the segments. 
Segment Assets and Other Items
Global Technology Services assets are primarily plant, property 
and equipment, including the assets associated with the outsourc-
ing business, goodwill, accounts receivable, deferred services 
arrangement transition costs, maintenance parts inventory and 
acquired intangible assets. Global Business Services assets are 
primarily goodwill and accounts receivable. Software assets are 
mainly goodwill, acquired intangible assets and accounts receiv-
able. Systems and Technology assets are primarily plant, property 
and equipment, goodwill, manufacturing inventory and accounts 
receivable. Global Financing assets are primarily financing receiv-
ables and fixed assets under operating leases.
	
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equip-
ment, several segments may share plant, property and equipment 
assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets 
is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user seg-
ment. This is consistent with the company’s management system 
and is reflected accordingly in the table on page 148. In those 
cases, there will not be a precise correlation between segment 
pre-tax income and segment assets.
	
Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment 
are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be 
consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’ 
pre-tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income 
reflect occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are 
not specifically identified by the management reporting system. 
Capital expenditures that are reported by each segment also are 
consistent with the landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
	
Global Financing amounts for interest income and inter-
est expense reflect the interest income and interest expense 
associated with the Global Financing business, including the 
intercompany financing activities discussed on page 31, as well 
as the income from investment in cash and marketable securities. 
The explanation of the difference between cost of financing and 
interest expense for segment presentation versus presentation in 
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is included on page 76 of 
the Management Discussion.


===== PAGE 149 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
148
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
For the year ended December 31:
Global 
Technology 
Services
Global 
Business 
Services
Software
Systems and 
Technology**
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments**
2014
Assets
$17,245
$7,795
$25,813
$4,235
$38,845
$93,933
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,873
58
1,210
712
455
4,308
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
2,272
33
534
600
482
3,921
Interest income
—
—
—
—
1,951
1,951
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
518
518
2013**
Assets
$18,048
$8,311
$27,101
$4,901
$40,138
$98,499
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,670
72
1,211
435
574
3,963
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,938
69
540
395
467
3,410
Interest income
—
—
—
—
1,904
1,904
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
405
405
2012**
Assets
$15,884
$8,022
$26,291
$5,092
$38,882
$94,170
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,597
75
1,157
404
853
4,088
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,760
42
618
517
708
3,644
Interest income
—
—
—
—
1,972
1,972
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
410
410
  * Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of intangible assets.
** Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.


===== PAGE 150 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
149
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
Assets
Total reportable segments
$  93,933
$  98,499
$  94,170
Elimination of internal transactions
(5,193)
(4,740)
(4,943)
Unallocated amounts
Cash and marketable securities
7,182
9,697
9,779
Notes and accounts receivable
4,253
2,907
3,987
Deferred tax assets
6,643
4,532
5,194
Plant, other property  
and equipment
2,169
4,827
4,900
Pension assets
2,160
5,551
945
Other
6,386
4,949
5,181
Total IBM consolidated assets
$117,532
$126,223 
$119,213 
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s 
total revenue in 2014, 2013 or 2012.
Geographic Information 
The following provides information for those countries that are 
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Revenue*
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013**
2012**
United States
$32,021
$33,427 
$  34,653 
Japan
8,382
9,070
10,696
Other countries
52,390
55,871
57,525
Total IBM consolidated revenue
$92,793
$98,367 
$102,874 
  * Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client. 
** Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
Plant and Other Property—Net
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2014
2013
2012
United States
$  4,388
$  6,723
$  6,555
Other countries
5,690
6,257
6,299
Total
$10,078
$12,979 
$12,854 


===== PAGE 151 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
150
Revenue by Classes of  
Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of 
products or services within the company’s reportable segments. 
Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, 
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other 
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software, 
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support 
are reported as Software, and software as a service, consulting, 
education, training and other product-related services are reported 
as Services. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013*
2012*
Global Technology Services
Services
$28,817
$29,953 
$31,161 
Maintenance
6,853
7,111
7,343
Systems
1,294
1,322
1,574
Software
165
164
159
Global Business Services
Services
$17,515
$18,065 
$18,216 
Software
185
221
208
Systems
124
109
142
Software
Software
$22,722
$23,420 
$23,144 
Services
2,712
2,512
2,304
Systems and Technology*
Servers
$  7,320
$  9,946 
$12,623 
Storage
2,676
3,041
3,411
Global Financing
Financing
$  1,543
$  1,493
$  1,471
Used equipment sales
491
529
542
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
NOTE U.  
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On January 27, 2015, the company announced that the Board 
of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.10 per common 
share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2015 to shareholders of 
record on February 10, 2015.
	
On February 4, 2015, the company issued $2.0 billion in bonds 
as follows: $1.5 billion of 3-year fixed-rate bonds with a 1.125 per-
cent coupon and $0.5 billion of 3-year floating-rate bonds priced 
at LIBOR plus 19 basis points.


===== PAGE 152 =====
151
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
Revenue
$  92,793
$  98,367
$102,874
$105,056
$  98,018
Income from continuing operations
$  15,751
$  16,881
$  16,999
$  16,108
$  15,082
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$   (3,729)
$      (398)
$      (395)
$      (253)
$      (249)
Net income
$  12,022
$  16,483
$  16,604
$  15,855
$  14,833
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings
$  16,702
$  18,356
$  18,022
$  16,571
$  15,272
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations
$    15.59
$    15.30
$    14.71
$    13.27
$    11.71
Discontinued operations
$     (3.69)
$     (0.36)
$     (0.34)
$     (0.21)
$     (0.19)
Total
$    11.90
$    14.94
$    14.37
$    13.06
$    11.52
Basic:
Continuing operations
$    15.68
$    15.42
$    14.88
$    13.46
$    11.89
Discontinued operations
$     (3.71)
$     (0.36)
$     (0.35)
$     (0.21)
$     (0.20)
Total
$    11.97
$    15.06
$    14.53
$    13.25
$    11.69
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
$    16.53
$    16.64
$    15.60
$    13.65
$    11.86
Cash dividends paid on common stock
$    4,265 
$    4,058
$    3,773
$    3,473
$    3,177
Per share of common stock
4.25
3.70
3.30
2.90
2.50
Investment in property, plant and equipment
$    3,740 
$    3,623
$    4,082
$    4,108
$    4,185
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity
72.5%
83.8%
81.6%
71.2%
66.8%
At December 31:
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
Total assets
$117,532 
$126,223 
$119,213 
$116,433 
$113,452 
Net investment in property, plant and equipment
$  10,771
$  13,821
$  13,996
$  13,883
$  14,096
Working capital
$    9,822
$  11,196
$    5,807
$    8,805
$    7,554
Total debt
$  40,804
$  39,718
$  33,269
$  31,320
$  28,624
Total equity
$  12,014
$  22,929
$  18,984
$  20,236
$  23,172
GAAP Reconciliation
Refer to the “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 45 and 63 for the 
reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2014, 2013 and 
2012. See the adjacent table for the reconciliation of non-GAAP 
financial information for 2011 and 2010. The reconciling items, as 
described in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings,” section on 
page 22, have not changed from previously reported amounts.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
As reported:
Revenue
$106,916
$99,870
Net income
15,855
14,833
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings
16,318
15,023
Diluted earnings per share
13.06
11.52
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share
13.44
11.67
Continuing operations:
Revenue
$105,056
$98,018
Income from continuing operations
16,108
15,082
Diluted earnings per share
13.27
11.71
Discontinued operations:
Revenue
$    1,859
$  1,853
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
(253)
(249)
Diluted earnings per share
(0.21)
(0.19)
Operating (non-GAAP):
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings
$  16,571
$15,272
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share
13.65
11.86


===== PAGE 153 =====
152
Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2014
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Full Year
Revenue
$22,236 
$24,047 
$22,397 
$24,113
$92,793
Gross profi t
$10,627 
$12,044 
$10,874 
$12,862
$46,407
Income from continuing operations
$ 2,530
$ 4,251
$ 3,455
$ 5,515
$15,751
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$  (146)
$  (115)
$ (3,437)
$   (31)
$ (3,729)
Net income
$ 2,384
$ 4,137
$    18
$ 5,484
$12,022
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings***
$ 2,790
$ 4,456
$ 3,671
$ 5,785
$16,702
Earnings per share of common stock*
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations
$  2.43
$  4.23
$  3.46
$  5.54
$ 15.59
Discontinued operations
$  (0.14)
$  (0.11)
$  (3.44)
$  (0.03)
$  (3.69)
Total
$  2.29
$  4.12
$  0.02
$  5.51
$ 11.90
Basic:
Continuing operations
$  2.44
$  4.25
$  3.48
$  5.57
$ 15.68
Discontinued operations
$  (0.14)
$  (0.11)
$  (3.46)
$  (0.03)
$  (3.71)
Total
$  2.30
$  4.14
$  0.02
$  5.54
$ 11.97
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)***
$  2.68
$  4.43
$  3.68
$  5.81
$ 16.53
Dividends per share of common stock
$  0.95
$  1.10
$  1.10
$  1.10
$  4.25
Stock prices**
High
$195.63
$199.21
$196.40
$190.89
Low
$172.19
$179.27
$181.70
$150.50
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2013
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Full Year
Revenue
$23,101 
$24,544 
$23,338 
$27,385
$98,367
Gross profi t
$10,734 
$12,184 
$11,429 
$14,337
$48,684
Income from continuing operations
$ 3,161
$ 3,365
$ 4,139
$ 6,216
$16,881
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$  (129)
$  (138)
$     (98)
$     (32)
$  (398)
Net income
$ 3,032
$ 3,226
$ 4,041
$ 6,185
$16,483
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings***
$ 3,505
$ 3,718
$ 4,485
$ 6,649
$18,356
Earnings per share of common stock*
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations
$  2.81
$  3.03
$  3.77
$  5.76
$ 15.30
Discontinued operations
$  (0.11)
$  (0.12)
$  (0.09)
$  (0.03)
$  (0.36)
Total
$  2.70
$  2.91
$  3.68
$  5.73
$ 14.94
Basic:
Continuing operations
$  2.84
$  3.06
$  3.79
$  5.80
$ 15.42
Discontinued operations
$  (0.12)
$  (0.13)
$  (0.09)
$  (0.03)
$  (0.36)
Total
$  2.72
$  2.93
$  3.70
$  5.77
$ 15.06
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)***
$  3.12
$  3.35
$  4.08
$  6.16
$ 16.64
Dividends per share of common stock
$  0.85
$  0.95
$  0.95
$  0.95
$   3.70
Stock prices**
High
$215.90
$214.89
$200.94
$187.79
Low
$190.39
$187.68
$181.10
$172.57
    *  Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed 
using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
  ** The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.
***  Refer to pages 44 and 45 in Attachment II of the company’s Form 8-K filed on January 20, 2015 and Attachment A of the company’s Form 8-K (Item 8.01) filed on October 20, 
2014 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the first and second quarters of 2014 and 2013, respectively. Refer to page 86 of the company’s third-quarter 
2014 Form 10-Q filed on October 28, 2014 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the third quarter of 2014 and 2013. See also the “GAAP Reconciliation,” 
sections on pages 45, 46 and 52 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the full year and fourth quarter of 2014 and 2013, respectively. The reconciling items 
described in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings,” section on page 22 have not changed from previously reported amounts.


===== PAGE 154 =====
153
Performance Graph
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF FIVE-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM, 
S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEX
The following graph compares the five-year cumulative total 
returns for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative 
return of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact 
that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the 
SEC’s rules require the use of that index. Under those rules, the 
second index used for comparison may be a published industry 
(U.S. Dollar)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
 IBM Common Stock
$100.00
$114.28 
$145.62
$154.26
$153.98
$134.89
 S & P 500 Index
100.00
115.06
117.49
136.30
180.44
205.14
 S & P Information Technology Index
100.00
110.19
112.84
129.57
166.41
199.89
240
280
80
200
160
120
09
10
11
12
13
14
or line-of-business index. The S&P Information Technology Index 
is such an index. IBM is also included in this index.
 
The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the 
initial year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 
invested on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The com-
parisons assume that all dividends are reinvested.


===== PAGE 155 =====
154
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Colleen F. Arnold
Senior Vice President 
IBM Sales and Distribution
Simon J. Beaumont
Vice President 
Tax and Treasurer 
Michelle H. Browdy
Senior Vice President  
Legal and Regulatory Affairs,
and General Counsel
Erich Clementi
Senior Vice President 
IBM Sales and Distribution
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen 
Senior Vice President  
IBM Sales and Distribution
Diane J. Gherson
Senior Vice President 
Human Resources
Jon C. Iwata
Senior Vice President 
Marketing and Communications
Martin Jetter
Senior Vice President 
IBM Global Technology Services
James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President
Transformation and Operations
John E. Kelly III
Senior Vice President  
Solutions Portfolio and Research
Kenneth M. Keverian
Senior Vice President
Corporate Strategy
Arvind Krishna
Senior Vice President and Director  
IBM Research
Robert J. LeBlanc
Senior Vice President 
IBM Cloud
Steven A. Mills
Executive Vice President  
Software and Systems
Christina M. Montgomery
Vice President  
Assistant General Counsel  
and Secretary
Robert J. Picciano
Senior Vice President 
IBM Analytics
Michael D. Rhodin
Senior Vice President 
IBM Watson
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer
Thomas W. Rosamilia
Senior Vice President 
IBM Systems
Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President and 
Chief Financial Officer
Stanley J. Sutula III
Vice President and Controller
Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President 
IBM Global Business Services
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Alain J.P. Belda
Managing Director 
Warburg Pincus LLC
William R. Brody
President 
Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Kenneth I. Chenault
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
American Express Company
Michael L. Eskew
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
United Parcel Service, Inc.
David N. Farr
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
Emerson Electric Co.
Alex Gorsky
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
Johnson & Johnson
Shirley Ann Jackson
President 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Andrew N. Liveris
Chairman, President and 
Chief Executive Officer 
The Dow Chemical Company
W. James McNerney, Jr.
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
The Boeing Company
James W. Owens
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
Caterpillar Inc.
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer 
IBM
Joan E. Spero
Adjunct Senior Research Scholar 
Columbia University School of 
International and Public Affairs
Sidney Taurel
Senior Advisor 
Moelis & Company
Peter R. Voser
Retired Chief Executive Officer 
Royal Dutch Shell plc


===== PAGE 156 =====
155
Stockholder Information 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A. 
P.O. Box 43078 
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 
(888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico 
should call (781) 575-2727.
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A.  
via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications 
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust 
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside 
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
IBM on the Internet
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found on the IBM home  
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM  
products, services and other activities can also be found at that address.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, 
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC.
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of information 
about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly 
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments 
to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material  
is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC (www.ibm.com/investor). 
These materials are available free of charge on or through our website.
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the 
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, 
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the 
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC 
maintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and 
information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file 
electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services 
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including  
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM  
stock certificates for safe­keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of  
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and 
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations, 
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,  
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of the  
Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the meeting by calling 
(914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by 
writing to International Business Machines Corporation, 1 New Orchard 
Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
Annual Meeting
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,  
April 28, 2015, at 10 a.m. in the Statehouse Convention Center,  
Little Rock, Arkansas.
Literature for IBM Stockholders
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A. 
P.O. Box 43078 
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 
(888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico 
should call (781) 575-2727.
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports  
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K 
report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by 
early May, August and November.
An audio recording of the 2014 Annual Report will be available for  
sight-impaired stockholders in June 2015.
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values and  
its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including its innovative 
strategies to transforming communities through global citizenship.  
The Report Summary is available in printed form and downloadable  
at www.ibm.com/responsibility. The full Corporate Responsibility Report  
is online with downloadable sections at www.ibm.com/responsibility.
General Information
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and 
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts  
on the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can  
also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements 
online through this site.
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental 
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States, 
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.


===== PAGE 157 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
Aspera, BladeCenter, Bluemix, Cloudant, Cognos, Daeja, DemandTec, 
Emptoris, FlashSystem, Flex System, Focal Point, IBM, IBM Watson, ILOG, 
Kenexa, Netezza, OpenPOWER, POWER, POWER8, Power Systems, 
Pure Systems, PurifyPlus, Rational, Showcase, Silverpop, Smarter 
Analytics, Smarter Cities, Smarter Commerce, Smarter Planet, SoftLayer, 
Star Analytics, StoredIQ, Storwize, System z, Tealeaf, Tivoli, Trusteer, 
UrbanCode, Varicent, Vivisimo, Watson, WebSphere, Worklight and  
Xtify are trademarks or registered trademarks of International Business 
Machines Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Apple is  
a registered trademark of Apple, Inc. in the United States, other  
countries, or both. GLOBALFOUNDRIES is a registered trademark of 
GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. Lenovo is a trademark of Lenovo Group 
Limited in the United States, other countries, or both. Linux is a registered 
trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, other countries, or  
both. SAP is a registered trademark of SAP SE in Germany and other 
countries. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open Group in the  
United States and other countries. Other company, product and service 
names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
Printed in the U.S.A.    COL03002-USEN-05
Design: VSA Partners, Inc.    Printing: RR Donnelley


===== PAGE 158 =====
