

===== PAGE 1 =====
2018  
Annual 
Report


===== PAGE 2 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
2018 was a defining year for IBM and our 
clients. Your company returned to growth,  
just as businesses readied to enter  
Chapter 2 of their digital reinventions.
For years, we have focused on building the tools businesses  
need in the 21st century. Our investments have reshaped IBM  
to lead in the emerging, high-value segments of the IT market, 
including analytics, artificial intelligence, cloud, security, 
blockchain and quantum computing. At the same time, we have 
deepened our longstanding commitment to the responsible 
stewardship of technology.
IBM is now ready to help our clients advance their  
business transformations.
In my letter to you this year, I will describe IBM’s  
performance in 2018. I will outline how clients are poised  
to enter Chapter 2 of their digital reinventions, with help from  
IBM, and how this translates to growth for IBM, for businesses  
and for the world.
2018: Return to Growth
In 2018, IBM achieved $79.6 billion in revenue and operating 
earnings per share of $13.81. For the full year, we returned to 
revenue growth, grew earnings per share and stabilized margins.
Our strategic and continued investment in innovative 
technology drove our improved competitive position and profit 
dynamics. Offerings that address data, AI, cloud, analytics and 
cybersecurity now represent more than half of our revenue—up 
from a quarter just four years ago—accounting for approximately 
$40 billion in revenue in 2018.
Our investment of more than $5 billion in research and 
development produced thousands of breakthrough innovations, 
which led to IBM’s 26th consecutive year of U.S. patent leadership. 
Of the 9,100 patents granted to IBM in 2018, more than 1,600 
were related to AI and 1,400 to cybersecurity—more than any 
other company in either area.


===== PAGE 3 =====
This focus on breakthrough innovation has created  
IBM’s strongest portfolio ever and has driven results:
–
– Total cloud revenues were more than $19 billion in 2018, up 
12 percent. In the fourth quarter alone, IBM signed 16 client 
services agreements worth more than $100 million to help 
optimize business performance on the IBM Cloud. Today,  
47 of the Fortune 50 depend on the IBM Cloud.
–
– IBM is the world’s enterprise AI leader. Solutions enabled  
by IBM Watson are helping produce better decision-making  
and business outcomes through more than 20,000 client 
engagements, across 20 industries to date. IDC ranked  
IBM number one in AI market share. We continue to pioneer 
innovations in natural language processing, speech processing, 
computer vision and machine learning. 
–
– IBM Blockchain is the global leader in improving trust and 
transparency across business networks by creating a new  
way for clients to share and secure data. IBM Blockchain  
now powers more than 500 client projects, with more than  
85 active networks transforming supply chains, global  
shipping and cross-border finance. 
–
– IBM Security, the world’s largest cybersecurity enterprise,  
has 8,000 subject matter experts serving more than 17,000 
clients in more than 130 countries. The industry’s leading  
AI and cloud-based security solutions include IBM Security 
Connect, launched in 2018, which allows clients to gather, 
integrate and analyze security data across multiple applications 
and tools, in a vendor-agnostic way. 
–
– IBM Systems produces innovative infrastructure for AI  
and hybrid cloud. The z14 is one of IBM’s most successful  
mainframe programs in history, with broad global adoption 
across 27 different industry segments. In addition, the  
U.S. Department of Energy’s POWER9-based supercomputers, 
Summit and Sierra, were ranked the most powerful 
supercomputers in the world in 2018.
–
– IBM Services was a key driver of IBM’s performance in 2018. 
Forty-seven engagements worth more than $100 million  
each helped major clients—like Bank of the Philippine Islands, 
Juniper Networks, Nordea, Westpac and Aditya Birla Retail—
move to the next stage of their digital transformations. 
New IBM investments are further energizing our portfolio. 
In late 2018, we announced plans to acquire Red Hat, the world’s 
leading open source technology provider for the enterprise.  
With this acquisition, which is expected to close in the second  
half of 2019, IBM will enhance our position as the world’s number  
one hybrid cloud provider, helping clients unlock the full business 
value of the cloud.
We also continued to divest stand-alone software and 
services assets that are no longer strategic for IBM. 
At the same time, we remained committed to returning 
capital to our shareholders. In 2018, we returned more than  
$10 billion to you, our shareholders, including dividends  
of $5.7 billion and gross share repurchases of $4.4 billion. 
We raised our dividend for the 23rd consecutive year—IBM’s  
103rd straight year of providing one.
Moving Clients to the Next Chapter of Digital Reinvention
For the past several years, businesses around the world have been 
driving their digital reinventions to take advantage of data, their 
most powerful source of competitive advantage.
This first chapter has been defined largely by experimenting 
with narrow and disparate AI applications and moving simple 
workloads—typically consumer and customer-facing applications—
to the cloud. 
Now, we are beginning to see the contours of Chapter 2 
among pioneering businesses: moving from experimentation to 
true business transformation at scale with AI and hybrid cloud. 
This next chapter of digital reinvention will be enterprise-
driven. It will be characterized first by scaling AI and embedding  
it everywhere in business. Second, in cloud, it will be characterized 
by moving mission-critical applications to hybrid cloud— 
using a combination of multiple public clouds, private clouds,  
and on-premise IT capabilities, so businesses can create  
the environment most suitable for their enterprise workloads. 
Underpinning it all is the growing importance of trust, both  
in technologies and in their impact on the world.
Scaling AI throughout the Enterprise
In Chapter 2 of their digital reinventions, businesses will begin  
to scale AI across the enterprise, as some first movers are already  
demonstrating.
Take the world’s leading banks, for example. While many  
have been applying AI to specific challenges, some first movers  
are scaling AI across the enterprise. Orange Bank, one of the 
fastest growing mobile banks in France, now manages all customer 
2


===== PAGE 4 =====
Virginia M. Rometty  
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer
service through IBM Watson. Similarly, Banco Bradesco  
is now using IBM Watson to assist every member of its services 
team—resolving customer inquiries in seconds with nearly 
95 percent accuracy. 
IBM brought AI for business into the mainstream  
with the introduction of our Watson platform in 2014. Today, 
IBM Watson is the most open and trusted AI for business,  
available to run on any environment—on premise, and in private 
and public clouds. Businesses can apply Watson to data wherever 
it is hosted and infuse AI into their applications, regardless of 
where they reside.
With Watson Studio, Watson Machine Learning and Watson 
OpenScale, IBM delivers a suite of tools that allow enterprises  
to build, deploy and manage their AI models in a hybrid cloud 
environment. IBM Watson OpenScale, a first-of-a-kind platform 
introduced in 2018, also enables businesses to manage their AI— 
no matter where it was built or where it runs—with transparency, 
explainability and bias mitigation. Addressing these factors, which 
traditionally have held businesses back, is critical for scaling  
AI throughout an enterprise.
Through IBM Services, we are helping our clients around  
the world apply AI to core business processes and workflows, 
infusing their businesses with automation, intelligence and 
continuous learning to transform everything from supply chains 
and HR to finance and operations.
In 2018, we also launched a new service called IBM Talent 
and Transformation that addresses the often overlooked cultural 
aspects of AI. This service helps our clients ensure their teams 
have the right skills and talent—and the supporting culture and 
work environment—to support a new way of working that is critical 
to scaling AI for business.
Moving Mission-Critical Work to Hybrid Cloud
In the first chapter of digital reinvention, cloud deployments 
largely focused on easily portable workloads for productivity and 
commodity computing. This primarily was driven by user-facing 
applications inspired by advances in consumer technology.  
As a result, only 20 percent of enterprise workloads today have 
moved to the cloud.
The remaining 80 percent of enterprise workloads provides 
the real value opportunity for business—transforming mission-
critical workloads and applications for the cloud. The challenge is 
that most businesses have unique regulatory or data requirements 
and anywhere from five to 15 clouds across multiple providers. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
That is why businesses moving to Chapter 2 will need to embrace 
a new, hybrid cloud approach. It is one that will allow them to more 
easily move data and scale AI and other applications across public, 
private and on-premise IT in their enterprises, with consistent 
management and security protocols, using open source technology. 
For example, BNP Paribas, a leading European bank, 
is working with IBM to speed and scale the launch of new digital 
and AI customer services across the cloud, while protecting 
the security and confi dentiality of customer data. Similarly, global 
telecom leader Vodafone Business is partnering with IBM to 
innovate the way it delivers 
multicloud and digital 
capabilities—including AI, 
edge computing, 5G and 
software-defi ned networking 
solutions—to its customers.
IBM Services provides 
end-to-end cloud integration 
capabilities and is helping 
thousands of businesses 
migrate, integrate and 
manage applications and 
workloads seamlessly and 
securely across any cloud environment. Industry experts from 
IBM Services are co-creating cloud-enabled solutions with clients 
in our IBM Garages. Using design thinking and agile methods, 
we are helping clients implement new ways of working, such as 
rapid prototyping and iteration to more quickly move technology 
projects from pilot to production at scale. 
We are ready for this moment of moving clients to Chapter 2 
of their digital reinventions with our unique integration of innovative 
technology, industry expertise and a reputation for trust and 
security earned over decades. IBM is now moving the world’s 
major enterprises to the next era, an effort that will be enhanced 
by our planned acquisition of Red Hat.
Chapter 2 of Trust and Responsible Stewardship
We recognize that our clients and the consumers they serve 
expect more than groundbreaking innovation and industry 
expertise. They want to work with technology partners they 
can trust to protect their data and handle it responsibly. 
They want to work with partners who know how to bring new 
technologies into the world safely and help society benefi t from 
them. And they want their partners to create inclusive workplaces 
and communities where diversity thrives.
#1 AI for business 
20,000+ IBM Watson client 
engagements across 20 industries.
#1 in hybrid cloud 
47 of the Fortune 50 rely on 
IBM Cloud. Revenue for IBM Cloud 
topped $19 billion in 2018.
#1 in enterprise services 
IBM Services, with end-to-end 
cloud and AI capabilities, closed 
47 client agreements worth more 
than $100 million each in 2018.
#1 in enterprise security
IBM Security manages 70 billion 
cybersecurity events per day for 
clients in more than 130 countries.
#1 in enterprise systems 
IBM Z is at the heart of world 
commerce with 30 billion transactions 
per day, including 87 percent of all 
credit card transactions.
#1 in U.S. patents for the 
26th consecutive year
IBM inventors received a record 9,100 
patents, including more than 3,000 
in AI, cloud and quantum computing.
#1 in blockchain 
IBM Blockchain Platform was 
ranked number one by analyst ﬁ rms 
Juniper Research and Everest Group.
#1 and #2 fastest 
supercomputers in the world 
Built by IBM for the U.S. Department 
of Energy, based on IBM POWER9 CPUs 
tuned for AI workloads.
IBM Leadership
“We are ready for this 
moment of moving 
clients to Chapter 2 
of their digital 
reinventions with our 
unique integration of 
innovative technology, 
industry expertise 
and a reputation for 
trust and security 
earned over decades.”


===== PAGE 6 =====
In an effort to provide additional and useful information regarding the company’s 
financial results and other financial information, as determined by generally 
accepted accounting principles (GAAP), these materials contain non-GAAP financial 
measures on a continuing operations basis, including operating earnings per share 
and operating pre-tax income. The rationale for management’s use of this non-GAAP 
information is included on pages 18 and 19 of the company’s 2018 Annual Report, 
which is Exhibit 13 to the Form 10-K submitted with the SEC on February 26, 2019. 
For reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP and other 
information, please refer to page 41 of the company’s 2018 Annual Report.
These expectations are linked by a common theme: 
responsibility. Responsibility has been a hallmark of IBM’s culture 
for 107 years—from our labs to our boardroom. IBMers’ unwavering 
global commitment to the responsible stewardship of data and 
powerful new technologies has earned us the trust of clients  
and society as a whole. 
In 2018, as trust in technology came under heightened  
global scrutiny, we published our IBM Principles for Trust and 
Transparency, which have long guided our company. They stress 
our belief that the purpose of new technologies is to augment— 
not replace—human intelligence, and that the data and insights  
derived from technology belong to the businesses who own  
them. The principles also emphasize that new technologies 
brought into the world must be open, transparent, explainable  
and free of bias. 
We know that AI, like other transformative technologies 
before it, will have a profound impact on peoples’ jobs and the 
workplace. That is why, in 2018, IBM further expanded access to 
the pathways through which students and professionals can build 
skills for today’s technology era. That includes “new collar” jobs, 
where having the right skills matters more than having a specific 
degree. Through our work in 11 U.S. states and 13 countries, there 
will be 200 Pathways in Technology Early College High Schools— 
or P-TECHs—serving a pipeline of 125,000 students in the 2019 
school year. 
2018 also saw the rapid growth of our IBM Apprenticeship 
Program, which trains people in 21st-century skills ranging  
from blockchain and digital design to cybersecurity—and which 
expanded nearly twice as fast as we had projected in its first year. 
Yet skills are only part of today’s workforce opportunity. 
In 2018, fueled by record diverse hiring, promotion and retention, 
we achieved our greatest progress in a decade on diversity 
representation among global executive women and 
underrepresented minorities. We also continued advocating  
with governments around the world for policies that help  
ensure workplaces are as inclusive and diverse as the world  
we live in.
Recognizing that responsible stewardship should not  
be confined within IBM’s walls, we also are working aggressively  
to empower others to do lasting good. We are, for example,  
a founding partner in Call for Code, a global initiative that  
works with software developers to create solutions that can  
help save lives. Last year, 100,000 open source developers from 
156 countries responded to the call, creating more than 2,500 
applications to help communities recover from natural disasters.
As IBM sees it, the promise of technology is to empower 
people to do good, access new opportunities and make the world 
better, safer and smarter—for the many, not just the few.
IBM Poised to Lead
In summary, we have returned your company to growth. We have 
positioned IBM’s products, services and people to enable clients  
to write the next chapter of their digital reinventions. And we have 
done it all while reaffirming IBM’s longstanding reputation for  
trust, integrity and responsibility. 
Our work ahead is to build on this progress and bring these 
capabilities to life for our clients. I want to thank all of our clients 
for partnering with us while we reinvented IBM, and for choosing 
us for their own journeys of transformation. 
I also would like to thank our investors for their confidence  
in IBM. Finally, I would like to thank the hundreds of thousands  
of IBMers whose expertise has prepared us to lead in this new 
chapter of digital reinvention. 
I am honored to steward this great company, and I am filled 
with optimism about what we can achieve in partnership with our 
clients and society. Together, we are changing work and business—
and ultimately, the world.
Virginia M. Rometty  
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
5


===== PAGE 7 =====
Leading 
businesses 
are reinventing 
themselves with 
IBM Services 
and Solutions 
across AI, cloud, 
blockchain, 
quantum 
and more.


===== PAGE 8 =====
IBM Services
even report an issue while a plane is still in the air, so the ground 
crew can get to work as soon as the plane lands. Customers on  
the next flight are far less likely to be affected because the app 
streamlines communication. “It’s been a game changer for us,” 
Deb says. “It lets us care for our customers right in the moment—
and nothing’s better than that.” 
The agile IBM Garage method helps organizations think 
beyond their existing systems and focus on what customers 
actually need. When combined with IBM Cloud and IBM Watson, 
it’s nothing less than a way for organizations to reinvent 
themselves—an approach that’s being adopted by enterprises 
around the world as they move to the next stage of digital 
reinvention. For example, it has helped create a startup culture in 
Banco Bradesco, one of Brazil’s largest banks. Bradesco can now 
quickly respond to the rising demand from its 75 million mobile 
banking customers. It has also showed East Carolina University 
new value in discarded data that enabled the school to predict 
possible outcomes, report strengths, weaknesses and deficits, and 
enable advisors to better assist students and improve educational 
programs. Digital reinvention isn’t just a product or a platform.  
And it’s certainly more than just a buzzword. It’s a promise:  
a new way to innovate and rethink a company from the ground  
up and help customers and businesses alike. 
To ignite a major business transformation, United Airlines 
turned to IBM iX—the business design arm of IBM Services—and  
a set of business applications from a global partnership between 
IBM and Apple called IBM MobileFirst for iOS. These applications 
combine the power of enterprise data and analytics with an 
elegant user experience, allowing United to broadly rethink how  
its crews work and how its work flows.
United and IBM used the IBM Garage method to design 
apps for the airline’s growing deployment of iOS devices.  
The IBM Garage method, used by IBM Services with clients around 
the world, emphasizes co-creation and frequent iteration. It has 
allowed United to build complete, integrated mobile platforms that 
start with a user’s experience and extend to all the airline’s core 
business processes. United is now able to foster better and faster 
collaboration across diverse teams and time zones, enabling  
it to focus on its core mission of transporting customers to their 
destinations on time. The apps are also giving flight attendants  
like Deb Winchell new ways to help customers enjoy their flights, 
which makes everyday travel just a little less stressful for  
everyone involved.
Frontline crews know that many factors can contribute  
to delays. “Most challenges stem from things I can’t control,”  
Deb says. “But when I can make a difference in a customer’s travel 
experience, it can be huge.” That’s why it’s important to resolve 
issues before they affect customers. Deb can now be more 
proactive with apps co-designed by United and IBM iX. Deb can 
With new mobile tools, United staff can 
quickly report and resolve issues that 
previously required multiple steps.
United Airlines:  
Reinvention  
takes flight
Flight attendant Deb Winchell knows 
better than most how stressful  
a delay can be—for customers and 
staff alike.
More than 60% 
savings in app development 
costs, compared to a 
traditional approach
7


===== PAGE 9 =====
It starts with a single report of severe food-borne illness.  
Then more reports pour in from around the country and from  
them, a culprit emerges: a common type of lettuce. But where, 
specifically, did the tainted lettuce come from? The work of 
Walmart and IBM, powered by IBM Blockchain, is giving us  
a better way to answer this question.
Until recently, tracing food hasn’t been easy or fast.  
And the risk that represents is significant. The World Health 
Organization has estimated that there are 600 million cases  
of foodborne illness each year, leading to 420,000 deaths.  
And it can be daunting to trace how food goes through the supply 
chain. For example, four days of a farm’s production of red-  
and green-leaf lettuce and cauliflower can generate more than  
200 separate tracking numbers that are printed onto cartons  
and pallets for shipping to buyers. Finding individual boxes of 
particular at-risk produce in this environment means searching 
through a haystack of paper records. IBM Food Trust—using 
blockchain technology—connects growers, processors, distributors 
and retailers through a permissioned, permanent and shared 
record of food-system data that drastically cuts the time  
needed to trace produce from farm to store. In a pilot program, 
tracing time was reduced from seven days to just 2.2 seconds.  
“With blockchain, all the trace media’s already there,” explains 
Tejas Bhatt, senior director, Food Safety, for Walmart.
Blockchain technology is also changing the way companies 
like Walmart collaborate with their supply chains—even with 
potential competitors. The IBM Food Trust ecosystem connects 
supply chains like Walmart’s and also those of other major retailers 
and global companies such as Carrefour, Dole, Golden State Foods, 
Driscoll’s and Nestlé—all without sharing any information they 
don’t want to share. Beyond safety, consumers increasingly value 
the kind of information that a system built on IBM Blockchain can 
provide. With blockchain, growers, distributors and retailers can 
provide consumers digitized certifications of existing organic or fair 
trade products along with detailed documentation from different 
points in the process, from farm to table. Ed Treacy, vice president, 
Supply Chain and Sustainability at the Produce Marketing 
Association, says blockchain “can speed up investigations into 
contaminated food, authenticating the origin of food and providing 
insights about the conditions and pathway through which the  
food traveled.” 
As more companies adopt a digital, end-to-end traceability 
protocol, the IBM Food Trust’s goal is to make the world’s food 
supply safer—something that is sorely needed. In 2018, the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration and U.S. Department of Agriculture 
issued more than 300 food recalls. In addition to the societal and 
business impact, these recalls waste huge stocks of food and 
erode consumer trust. And if outbreaks multiply and answers are 
slow in coming, customers can become desensitized and begin to 
ignore overly broad warnings such as “throw away all lettuce in 
your refrigerator.” Work by companies like Walmart and other 
participants in the IBM Food Trust are laying the foundation for 
better management of our global food supply: rapid insight into 
what’s happened when something goes wrong, reducing waste, 
and a safer journey from the farm to our local markets and, 
ultimately, to our dinner table.
With the IBM Food Trust, Walmart’s 
food safety professionals can  
trace produce back to its source  
in just seconds.
Walmart:  
Linked by  
safer food
IBM Blockchain adds new transparancy 
to the global food supply chain.
From 
7 days
Down to 
2.2 seconds
IBM Blockchain
8


===== PAGE 10 =====
Watson eliminates distractions  
that come between branch  
director François-Xavier Maille  
and his clients.
When Crédit Mutuel embarked on its “together#newworld” 
initiative—a five-year project to become a leading digital bank— 
it brought in IBM to help it reinvent itself.
Crédit Mutuel’s goal: to engage with customers more 
deeply, both online and offline, while providing new products  
and the fastest service—all in an environment of trust and security. 
To do that, the bank is infusing IBM Watson into the applications 
its advisors use and is embracing IBM Cloud as a platform  
for innovation, trust and security. 
François-Xavier Maille, director of one of the premier 
branches of Crédit Mutuel bank in Paris, was the first to deploy 
the initial AI solution: a Watson virtual assistant that helps 
employees answer customers’ questions. “The application has 
liberated our people from a few recurring tasks so they can devote 
their time and talents to understanding our clients’ aspirations, 
challenges, and circumstances,” says François-Xavier. Today, 
23,000 Crédit Mutuel advisors across France rely on the Watson 
tool, which helps employees answer business-related questions 
60% faster. The bank intends to use Watson across all of its 
business lines. 
But that’s just the start. Crédit Mutuel is making important 
decisions—about data, compliance and regulation, cybersecurity, 
and managing applications across the enterprise. To achieve 
digital banking at scale, IBM and Crédit Mutuel are crafting a hybrid 
cloud strategy that encompasses multiple clouds and on-premise 
systems, including the mainframe. At the same time, experts  
from Crédit Mutuel and IBM Services are working together  
in a “Cognitive Factory” that provides a fertile environment for 
identifying, building and deploying new AI solutions. With many 
internal IT teams involved, IBM and Crédit Mutuel are also creating 
industrial tools and training assets to efficiently expand cognitive 
solutions to 100% of the business lines of the company.
Crédit Mutuel’s reinvention represents a synthesis of human 
and machine that gives banking new power. Employees can find 
the optimal blend of talent and data, use their talents to the fullest, 
delve more deeply into clients’ financial challenges and develop 
smarter, more creative solutions. Extrapolate IBM’s immediate 
impact on Crédit Mutuel to the entire world of financial services, 
Experts from  
Crédit Mutuel and  
IBM Services are  
working together in  
a “Cognitive Factory.”
60%
faster responses to 
business inquiries
175,000
daily emails routed 
and prioritized
and you can see the implications for how banking consumers 
experience and engage with their financial institutions: More 
relevant innovation for customers. Lower client turnover for banks. 
Greater confidence in asset management for consumers. Higher 
employee engagement and contributions. Growing customer 
satisfaction. And more predictable performance for institutions.  
AI accelerates access to relevant information and liberates people 
to provide a human touch.
Crédit Mutuel: 
A bank thinks 
bigger
IBM Cloud · IBM Watson
9


===== PAGE 11 =====
DeKalb Medical takes a systems-based, data-intensive 
approach to fighting dangerous infections with the help  
of IBM Watson Health. One of the lesser-known challenges  
it faces is sepsis, which is caused by an infection that triggers  
an inflammatory immune response. Sepsis is notoriously  
difficult to diagnose and treat, making it the third-leading  
cause of death in the U.S. 
Nurses see it all, and sepsis requires them to race  
against the clock. But with the intelligent use of data, delivered  
by IBM Watson Health and deployed by a team led by Christina 
English, a quality management specialist and former bedside 
nurse, clinicians at DeKalb are getting a step ahead to help  
patients get better, faster. Previously, Christina and her team had  
to fight sepsis with siloed and sometimes subjective information.  
“We knew what to look for, but we didn’t understand the 
importance of the symptoms, how they worked together and how  
a clearly defined set of treatment measures is critical to success,” 
she says. Using IBM CareDiscovery, part of Watson Health’s set  
of performance-improvement solutions for healthcare providers, 
Christina and her team were able to gather and analyze industry 
benchmarks as well as their own performance metrics in order  
to identify sepsis “flags” and pinpoint where DeKalb could take 
proactive measures.
DeKalb is shifting to a systems-based approach to care. 
The IBM Watson Health solution helped Ellen Hargett, executive 
director of DeKalb’s Quality Institute, and her team change the way 
they measure system-wide performance by organizing data and 
analysis into a usable dashboard. For each key performance metric 
on the dashboard, Ellen established tactical teams to fully 
understand the metrics, determine the “why” behind them and 
recommend tactics for improvement. Across healthcare, a 
systems-based approach can also produce a significant positive 
impact on resources. For example, sepsis is not only a medical 
challenge for hospitals. It’s also the most costly reason for 
hospitalization, consuming $24 billion each year in the U.S. alone. 
DeKalb’s efforts to quantify, analyze and shift the diagnosis and 
treatment of sepsis have not only led to a lower mortality rate but 
also significantly reduced the length of stay for patients.
Individual treatments are now based on data informed  
by large-scale findings across large populations. Historically, 
doctors diagnosed through trained intuition. In recent decades, 
however, this approach has been replaced by “empirical medicine” 
that’s based on data. The result is more standardized treatments 
and improved outcomes. At DeKalb, data is shared with healthcare 
professionals, providing them with information to spot large 
patterns or gaps. Watson Health’s data-driven tools allow 
healthcare institutions to organize and visualize data and take  
fast action to address weaknesses or roll out improvements. 
A data-driven approach to challenges like sepsis also helps 
doctors expand their understanding of the syndrome, improving 
diagnosis and treatment. This trajectory will eventually create  
a new era of healthcare. As medical professionals tap data at both 
the systemic and individual levels, an age of “precision medicine” 
will arise. It will be a time when understanding derived from the 
many can be tailored and applied to the needs of the individual.
Christina English is helping to lead  
DeKalb Medical’s fight against sepsis.
This data-driven  
approach will eventually  
create a new era  
of healthcare. 
30%
fewer lives lost  
to sepsis
DeKalb Medical:  
Stronger medicine
IBM Watson Health


===== PAGE 12 =====
Predictive intelligence is 
starting to create new options 
that can make extreme 
weather more manageable  
and less disruptive.
33%
faster electricity 
restoration than 
similar storms
Emergency 
Recovery Award 
from the Edison 
Electric Institute
Another late spring storm was rolling toward the Canadian 
utility Hydro One. But in its ongoing battle with ice, snow,  
wind and thunderstorms, this time the utility found calm in the 
predictive power of The Weather Company and IBM Watson.
Derek Roles, director, Emergency Preparedness and 
Restoration, is Hydro One’s first line of defense for a service area 
that covers most of Ontario. Twenty years of experience and  
an encyclopedic knowledge of winter storms have helped him 
manage through many major disruptions, so Derek can usually  
plan for the worst. Now, though, he can predict it. And that 
changes everything. In the past, recovery teams were deployed 
only after the weather had passed. Now, however, Derek doesn’t 
just keep up with the weather—he stays ahead of it. This shift  
was made possible because Derek and his team put data and  
AI to work: they trained Watson to predict outages using five years 
of Hydro One historical outage data and a massive amount of 
Ontario’s historical weather information. Derek’s new predictive 
tools help him paint a clearer picture of how a storm will affect  
the utility’s electrical distribution network.
Hydro One has committed itself to a more proactive 
approach, and the utility has not only gained a new way to  
fight storms, but has also changed its basic business operations  
to strengthen its customers’ experience and service quality.  
The predictive power of AI enables Hydro One to activate its 
emergency organization structure in advance and create detailed 
team deployment plans, positioning some crews in the storm’s 
predicted path while making sure other crews are well rested.  
The utility is also able to staff call centers more effectively and 
notify customers of a storm’s potential impact on their service.  
So when a storm hits, restoration plans are already in motion and 
work crews can spring into action faster than ever before, quickly 
and safely scaling repairs from the main transmission grid to 
smaller circuits to individual customer locations in remote areas.
Weather exerts a tremendous influence on the economy.  
It affects productivity, sales and energy consumption, and  
it can disrupt supply chains and transportation systems.  
Severe weather can upend lives and businesses for hours, weeks,  
years or even forever. So there’s a logic behind the expression  
“ride out the storm”—that’s often been the only option.  
But predictive intelligence is starting to create new options that 
can make extreme weather more manageable and less disruptive.  
This is especially critical at a time when severe weather is the 
leading cause of power disruptions in many countries. Global 
economic losses resulting from weather disasters totaled 
$215 billion last year. By putting the power of data and Watson  
to work, Hydro One is modeling new solutions for previously 
intractable weather problems everywhere—problems that  
can now be better understood and managed, along with human 
risks that can now be met head-on with artificial intelligence.
With Watson, Hydro One’s  
Derek Roles, director, Emergency 
Preparedness and Restoration, 
can restore power more quickly 
after a storm. 
Hydro One: 
Outsmarting  
the storm
IBM Watson
11


===== PAGE 13 =====
Vijay Swarup, ExxonMobil vice president for Research  
and Development, says energy research requires curiosity, 
optimism, patience and dissatisfaction. Dissatisfaction because 
he believes things can be better. But what, exactly, can be better? 
Nothing less than our understanding of the world.
Researchers now have a new tool to explore new ways  
to solve problems: quantum computing. And Vijay’s quite precise 
about the trouble with our current understanding. “There are some 
problems so big, all we can do is approximate,” he says. Whether 
he’s in a business suit or the lab coat he wears at ExxonMobil’s 
expansive New Jersey research facility, Vijay clearly enjoys trying 
to solve what he calls today’s pressing dual challenge: ensuring 
that people have access to scalable, affordable energy, and doing 
so in the context of climate change and the need for sustainable 
solutions. This is where IBM Q comes into the picture. Quantum 
computers have long been considered theoretical. But today, 
they’re becoming a reality, with huge potential for energy 
companies like ExxonMobil. That said, using a quantum computer 
also calls for significant change in how researchers think about 
approaching their work. “Computation has always been an integral 
part of the research we’ve done here, but quantum’s radically 
different,” Vijay explains. “Now, we must first figure out which 
problems are most suited to a quantum approach and only then 
can we answer a more interesting question: How can you program 
a quantum computer to solve energy problems?”
ExxonMobil joins a group of global corporations  
partnering with IBM to work side-by-side on IBM’s fully 
functional quantum computers. As Vijay says, quantum’s a 
priority that requires pairing the “best minds with the best minds.” 
So ExxonMobil has a team that will meet regularly with IBM’s 
quantum researchers. Barclays has its own team working  
on quantum, as do Samsung and Daimler. Working as part of the 
IBM Q Network alongside global universities and national research 
labs, these corporations see the potential of a massive shift in how 
computers can help solve some of the most enduring challenges—
issues that, once solved, could transform entire industries.  
“IBM Q System One is the world’s first integrated universal quantum 
computing system designed for scientific and commercial use,” 
says Dario Gil, director, IBM Research. “We are at the beginning  
of an exciting journey. Our research, systems and business teams— 
along with our IBM Q Network partners—have a bold vision.  
They are thinking big. These are the true pioneers.”
Nature is no longer estimated but predicted and 
understood. That’s the goal. So when IBM unveiled its quantum 
machines, companies like ExxonMobil saw great promise. But when 
you talk to Vijay about promise, his thoughts turn to the great needs 
that are facing the world. “Our global population is increasing  
from 7 billion to 9 billion and, all across the world, a growing middle 
class requires more resources and, especially, more energy.” 
Quantum might be well suited to solve super-complex problems, 
such as advanced models which could lead to better approaches  
to carbon capture and lower emissions sources of energy. But what 
excites Vijay most is that the collaboration with IBM researchers 
could lead to a fresh ability to predict and anticipate how nature 
operates—which could lead to an understanding of what’s actually 
happening, as opposed to an approximation of what might be 
happening. “With a little curiosity, patience and not settling for  
the status quo, I know we can get there,” he says.
ExxonMobil:  
Quantum 
understanding
ExxonMobil’s vice president  
for Research and Development, 
Vijay Swarup, is leading  
the company’s exploration  
of quantum computing.
IBM Q System One is the world’s  
first integrated quantum computing 
system for commercial use.
Provide access  
to scalable, 
affordable  
energy
Reduce 
the risks  
of climate  
change
Every energy company’s 
dual challenge:
IBM Quantum
12


===== PAGE 14 =====
Thought Machine, a London-based 
fintech startup, has built Vault,  
a new, cloud-native core banking 
infrastructure launching on 
IBM Cloud. It has also partnered with 
IBM Services to provide advisory  
and delivery capabilities to its clients.
Japan Airlines is using an IBM Watson-
powered chatbot, Makana-chan,  
to answer customers’ questions about  
its popular Tokyo-to-Honolulu flights. 
Makana-chan eases the burden  
on live agents and is very popular  
with passengers.
Travelport, a travel commerce 
platform, is working with IBM Watson 
to integrate disparate information 
sources and make stronger corporate 
travel recommendations. As a result, 
finding the lowest travel costs for  
a company will be quicker and easier.
Maersk, the container logistics giant, 
is using IBM Blockchain to create 
TradeLens, a global blockchain 
solution for the shipping ecosystem. 
This global transformation will lead  
to faster delivery times, lower costs 
and a noticeable difference in the way 
we get the things we use every day.
Suunto, creator of the Movesense 
microsensor, launched a Movesense 
development community enabled  
in the IBM Cloud. This let Suunto 
dramatically scale its offerings.  
Today, more than 800 developers  
are working with Movesense, helping 
Suunto bring the device to new 
customers all over the world.
KMD, Denmark’s largest technology 
company, is dedicated to connecting 
its clients to the latest technologies. 
The company is using IBM Services  
to provide a critical foundation  
of servers, networks and other 
technologies that help it handle  
large volumes of data with high 
levels of security.
Smart Dubai, working with  
IBM Blockchain and IBM Cloud,  
has launched the region’s first 
government-endorsed blockchain 
service: Dubai Blockchain Platform.  
It is designed to make the technology 
more accessible to the Dubai 
government, the UAE national 
government and private companies.
Whirlpool Corporation is using 
IBM Cloud to help manage all  
the data from its manufacturing  
of connected home appliances. 
Whirlpool will be using the cloud  
to manage critical enterprise 
applications, which will give it more 
flexibility to scale and innovate.
Fluor Corporation builds mega-
projects across the globe. Data 
generated by these projects has  
been harnessed by working with 
IBM Research and IBM Services. 
Fluor recently introduced two new 
AI-powered systems to uncover  
and predict how unmitigated trends 
could affect key project indicators.
Telefónica turned to IBM Blockchain 
to capture call data in real time  
and save it in a format that’s trusted, 
traceable and accessible to network 
providers and carriers worldwide, 
making international phone calls feel 
seamless despite all the technological 
leaps they require. 
View these stories  
and more at  
ibm.com/annualreport 
Bausch + Lomb simplified the  
service and maintenance process  
for its high-tech Stellaris Elite Vision 
Enhancement System for cataract and 
retina surgery. Using IBM Cloud, the 
company can now pinpoint or respond 
to technical and service requests  
and limit or minimize downtime.
KPMG is using IBM Watson to  
power a contract analysis solution  
for its clients. The solution examines 
contracts, breaks them into their 
component parts and interprets each 
part with a high degree of accuracy. 
It’s faster and less expensive than 
manual methods, while freeing up 
skilled resources to perform more 
productive tasks.
More clients  
are partnering  
with IBM to write  
the next chapters  
of their digital 
reinventions.
Belron applied IBM Watson Visual 
Recognition to its Autoglass Body 
Repair business to speed up insurance 
processing, move repairs along  
quickly and help its customers get 
back on the road fast.
BNP Paribas is accelerating its digital 
transformation and improving its 
operational efficiency. The bank will 
now integrate IBM Cloud-hosted data 
centers dedicated to the bank, and  
will strengthen its hybrid cloud “as a 
service” capabilities while ensuring 
the security and confidentiality of their 
customers’ data—including not using 
public clouds for hosting any customer 
or other production environments  
with sensitive information.
The Australian Federal Government 
has set its sights on being one of the 
world’s top three digital governments 
by 2025. In July 2018, it announced  
a five-year agreement that covers 
solutions from IBM Cloud, IBM Watson, 
IBM Security, IBM Research and the 
IBM Q quantum computing initiative.
Profility, a post-surgery rehabilitation 
solutions provider, needed to integrate 
large volumes of data as well as  
meet stringent HIPAA regulations. 
They chose IBM Cloud because  
of its flexible software and secure, 
dedicated hardware. Their system  
is widely used and has resulted  
in shorter rehab stays and fewer  
hospital readmissions.
Krungsri Bank, one of Thailand’s 
largest financial institutions,  
is working with IBM Services to  
lay the foundation for its future.  
An IBM Blockchain pilot is in  
progress, and the bank is planning  
to develop new services for  
its customers.
13


===== PAGE 15 =====
Responsible 
stewardship and 
trust have been 
hallmarks of 
IBM’s culture— 
from our labs to 
the boardroom— 
for more than  
a century.
Data Responsibility 
At IBM, we’ve always followed straightforward principles  
to act responsibly and earn trust. Today, our principles include:
–
– The purpose of new technologies is to augment—not replace— 
human intelligence. 
–
– Data and insights belong to their owner.
–
– New technology, including AI, must be transparent  
and explainable.
Recent actions demonstrate our principles at work, including:
•	 Advocating for public policies to protect the privacy and 
security of data and working with governments worldwide  
on strategies that will ensure privacy and responsible handling 
of data, without undermining innovation.
•	 Partnering with STOP THE TRAFFIK, law enforcement and 
financial services institutions to stop human trafficking by using 
IBM software analytics to identify suspicious trends, hotspots 
and financial transactions.
•	 Launching AI Fairness 360, an open source software toolkit to 
help developers actively detect and reduce bias in datasets and AI.
•	 Releasing Diversity in Faces, a first-of-its-kind dataset,   
to help reduce bias in facial recognition systems, making them 
fairer and more accurate.
1 million annotated human facial images 
Modern slavery, a $150 billion business, has a new foe: 
an AI data hub on the IBM Cloud.
IBM is recognized as  
one of the World’s Most 
Ethical Companies by 
the Ethisphere Institute, 
highlighting our influence 
in driving positive change 
in business and society 
around the world.
14


===== PAGE 16 =====
Diversity and Inclusion
In 2018, fueled by record diverse hiring, promotion and  
retention, IBM achieved our greatest progress in a decade  
on diversity representation among global executive women  
and underrepresented minorities. We also continued advocating 
with governments around the world for policies that help  
ensure workplaces are as inclusive and diverse as the world  
we live in. We received widespread recognition in 2018  
for this leadership, including:
•	 Being honored with a 2018 
Catalyst Award for leadership  
in advancing women in business, 
becoming the first company to  
win the award four times and the 
only tech company so honored  
in the last 20 years.
•	 Being named a 2018 Diversity Best Practices Leading 
Inclusion Index Company by Working Mother.
•	 Scoring a perfect 100 percent for the 15th consecutive year  
in the Human Rights Campaign Corporate Equality Index. 
Jobs and Skills
In the 1940s, IBM partnered with Columbia University to create  
a new discipline: computer science. In 2018, we continued this 
tradition by expanding training and education for the growing 
number of “new collar” jobs for today’s era of data and AI.  
Recent examples include:
•	 Developing new talent with our 12-month IBM Apprenticeship 
Program in areas including cybersecurity, digital design, 
mainframe administration and software development. Hundreds 
of apprentices—ranging in age from 18 to 59—have joined the 
program, which includes training and on-the-job experience 
guided by an IBM mentor.
•	 Launching Skills Build, an IBM volunteer initiative that helps  
more than three million primary and secondary school students 
learn about new technologies.
•	 Continuing to transform education via P-TECH—Pathways  
to Technology Early College High School. In the 2019 school 
year, there will be:
200 P-TECH schools serving a pipeline of  
125,000 students across  
13 countries and 11 U.S. states
Brandon Whittington, IBM Blockchain Solutions support 
engineer and graduate of the IBM’s Apprenticeship Program
IBMers at the Pride March in New York
P-TECH students at a graduation ceremony
15


===== PAGE 17 =====
Financial Highlights 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Revenue
$  79,591
$  79,139
Net Income
$    8,728*
$    5,753*
Income from continuing operations
$    8,723*
$    5,758*
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings** 
$  12,657
$  12,807***
 
 
Earnings per share of common stock—continuing operations 
 
 
Assuming dilution
$      9.51*
$      6.14*
Basic
$      9.56*
$      6.17*
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)**
$    13.81
$    13.66***
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
$  15,247
$  16,724
Capital expenditures, net
$    3,716
$    3,312
Share repurchases
$    4,443
$    4,340
Cash dividends paid on common stock
$    5,666
$    5,506
Per share of common stock
$      6.21
$      5.90
 
 
At December 31: 
2018
2017
Cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities
$  12,222
$  12,842****
Total assets
$123,382
$125,356
Working capital
$  10,918
$  12,373
Total debt 
$  45,812
$  46,824
Total equity
$  16,929
$  17,725
Common shares outstanding (in millions)
892
922
Stock price per common share
$  113.67
$  153.42
*	     Includes charges of $2.0 billion in 2018 and $5.5 billion in 2017 associated with U.S. tax reform.
**	    See page 41 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
***  Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit costs.
****Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash.
16


===== PAGE 18 =====
17
Report of Financials 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION
Overview
18
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements
19
Management Discussion Snapshot
19
Description of Business
22
Year in Review
27
Prior Year in Review
48
Other Information 
59
	
Looking Forward
59
	
Liquidity and Capital Resources
60
	
Critical Accounting Estimates
63
	
Currency Rate Fluctuations
66
	
Market Risk
66
	
Cybersecurity
67
	
Employees and Related Workforce
67
Report of Management
68
Report of Independent Registered 
 
	
Public Accounting Firm
69
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Earnings
70
Comprehensive Income
71
Financial Position
72
Cash Flows
73
Changes in Equity
74
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
A	
Significant Accounting Policies
 76
B	
Accounting Changes
89
C 	 Acquisitions/Divestitures
91
D 	 Financial Instruments
95
E	
Inventories
103
F	
Financing Receivables
103
G	 Property, Plant and Equipment 
106
H	 Investments and Sundry Assets
107
I	
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
107
J	
Borrowings
108
K	
Other Liabilities
111
L	
Equity Activity
111
M	 Contingencies and Commitments
115
N	 Taxes
117
O	 Revenue Recognition
120
P	
Research, Development and Engineering
122
Q	 Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
123
R	
Rental Expense and Lease Commitments
124
S	
Stock-Based Compensation
124
T	
Retirement-Related Benefits
127
U	 Segment Information
141
V	
Subsequent Events
146
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
147
Selected Quarterly Data
148
Performance Graphs
149
Stockholder Information
150 
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
151


===== PAGE 19 =====
18
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW
The financial section of the International Business Machines 
Corpor­ation (IBM or the company) 2018 Annual Report includes 
the Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial 
Statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial State­
ments. This Over­view is designed to provide the reader with 
some perspective regarding the information contained in the 
financial section.
Organization of Information
•	 The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers 
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the 
company’s financial results and certain factors that may 
affect its future prospects from the perspective of the 
company’s management. The “Management Discussion 
Snap­shot,” beginning on page 19, presents an overview of 
the key performance drivers in 2018.
•	 Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 27, the Manage­
ment Discussion contains the results of operations for each 
reportable segment of the business and a discussion of  
the company’s financial position and cash flows. Other key 
sections within the Management Discussion include: 
“Looking Forward” on page 59, and “Liquidity and Capital 
Resources” on page 60, which includes a description of 
management’s definition and use of free cash flow.
•	 The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on 
pages 70 through 75. These statements provide an overview 
of the company’s income and cash flow performance and  
its financial position.
•	 The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Among other items, the Notes contain the company’s 
accounting policies (pages 76 to 88), acquisitions and 
divestitures (pages 91 to 94), certain contingencies and 
commitments (pages 115 to 117), revenue (pages 120 to 122) 
and retirement-related plans information (pages 127 to 141).
•	 The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have 
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles 
generally accepted in the United States (GAAP).
•	 On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (U.S.  
tax reform) was enacted in the U.S. This Act resulted in the 
company recording a charge of $5.5 billion in the fourth-
quarter 2017. For the full-year 2018, the company recorded 
additional charges of $2.0 billion, including $1.9 billion in 
the fourth quarter, primarily related to the election to 
include Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) in 
measuring deferred taxes. Refer to note N, “Taxes,” on 
pages 117 to 119 for additional information.
•	 Effective January 1, 2018, the company adopted the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) guidance on 
presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension 
postretirement benefit costs (net benefit cost). The 
guidance is primarily a change in financial statement 
presentation, but it did impact the consolidated and 
reportable segment gross profit margins and expense and 
other income. As a result, the company aligned its 
presentation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings to conform  
to the FASB presentation of these costs in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. The periods presented in this  
Annual Report are reported on a comparable basis.
•	 The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant 
currency” in the Management Discussion do not include 
operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in 
foreign currency rates. When the company refers to growth 
rates at constant currency or adjusts such growth rates for 
currency, it is done so that certain financial results can be 
viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign 
currency exchange rates, thereby facilitating period-to-
period comparisons of its business performance. Financial 
results adjusted for currency are calculated by translating 
current period activity in local currency using the comparable 
prior-year period’s currency conversion rate. This approach 
is used for countries where the functional currency is the 
local currency. Generally, when the dollar either strengthens 
or weakens against other currencies, the growth at constant 
currency rates or adjusting for currency will be higher or lower 
than growth reported at actual exchange rates. See “Currency 
Rate Fluctuations” on page 66 for additional information.
•	 Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual 
Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to the 
use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes. 
Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying 
whole-dollar numbers.
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational 
results of the business, the company separates business results 
into operating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings 
from continuing operations is a non-GAAP measure that excludes 
the effects of certain acquisition-related charges, intangible asset 
amortization expense resulting from basis differences on equity 
method investments, retirement-related costs, discontinued 
operations and related tax impacts. Due to the unique, non-
recurring nature of the enactment of U.S. tax reform, the company 
characterizes the one-time provisional charge recorded in the 
fourth quarter of 2017 and all 2018 adjustments to that charge 
as non-operating. Adjustments include true-ups, accounting 
elections, any changes to regulations, laws, audit adjustments, 
etc. that affect the recorded one-time charge. For acquisitions, 
operating (non-GAAP) earnings exclude the amortization of 
purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related charges 
such as in-process research and development, transaction costs, 
applicable restructuring and related expenses, tax charges 
related to acquisition integration and pre-closing charges. For 
the 2019 operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share expectation, 
acquisition-related charges associated with the Red Hat, Inc. (Red 
Hat) acquisition exclude pre-closing charges, such as financing 
costs. These charges are excluded as they may be inconsistent 
in amount and timing from period to period and are dependent 
on the size, type and frequency of the company’s acquisitions. 
All other spending for acquired companies is included in both 
earnings from continuing operations and in operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings. Throughout the Management Discussion and Analysis, 
the impact of acquisitions over the prior 12-month period may 
be a driver of higher expense year to year. For retirement-related 
costs, the company characterizes certain items as operating and 
others as non-operating, consistent with GAAP. The company 
includes defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement 
benefit plan service cost, multi-employer plan costs and the 
cost of defined contribution plans in operating earnings. Non-
operating retirement-related costs include defined benefit 
plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan amortization 
of prior service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan 


===== PAGE 20 =====
19
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan 
curtailments/settlements, pension insolvency costs and other 
costs. Non-operating retirement-related costs are primarily 
related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are 
tied to financial market performance, and the company considers 
these costs to be outside of the operational performance of 
the business. 
Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a 
view of operating earnings as described above provides increased 
transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the 
business and the performance of the company’s pension plans; 
improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts 
on operational performance; enables better comparison to peer 
companies; and allows the company to provide a long-term 
strategic view of the business going forward. The company’s 
reportable segment financial results reflect operating earnings 
from continuing operations, consistent with the company’s 
management and measurement system. 
FORWARD-LOOKING AND CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may 
constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the 
Private Secur­ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-
looking statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of the 
date on which it is made; the company assumes no obligation 
to update or revise any such statements. Forward-looking 
statements are based on the company’s current assumptions 
regarding future business and financial performance; these 
statements, by their nature, address matters that are uncertain 
to different degrees. Forward-looking statements involve a 
number of risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause 
actual results to be materially different, as discussed more fully 
elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s filings with 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the 
company’s 2018 Form 10-K filed on February 26, 2019.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/Margin 
Change
Revenue
$  79,591
$  79,139
0.6%*
Gross profit margin
46.4%
46.7%**
(0.3) pts.
Total expense and other (income)
$  25,594
$  25,543**
0.2%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio
32.2%
32.3%**
(0.1 ) pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
$  11,342
$  11,400
(0.5)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations
$    2,619+
$    5,642+
(53.6)%
Income from continuing operations
$    8,723+
$    5,758+
51.5%
Income from continuing operations margin
11.0%
7.3%
3.7 pts.
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
$          5
$          (5)
  NM
Net income
$    8,728+
$    5,753+
51.7%
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution
$      9.51+
$      6.14+
54.9%
Consolidated earnings per share—assuming dilution
$      9.52+
$      6.14+
55.0%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
916.3
937.4
(2.2)%
Assets++
$123,382
$125,356
(1.6)%
Liabilities++
$106,452
$107,631
(1.1)%
Equity++
$  16,929
$  17,725
(4.5)%
*	  0.0 percent adjusted for currency.
**	 Recast to reflect adoption of FASB guidance on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit costs.
+ 	 Includes charges of $2.0 billion or $2.23 of diluted earnings per share in 2018 and $5.5 billion or $5.84 of diluted earnings per share in 2017 
associated with U.S. tax reform.
++At December 31
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 21 =====
20
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-
GAAP) earnings for 2018 and 2017.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change
Net income as reported
$  8,728+
$  5,753 +
51.7%
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
5
(5)
NM
Income from continuing operations
$  8,723+
$  5,758 +
51.5%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
649
718
(9.7)
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income)
1,248
856**
45.9
U.S. tax reform charge
2,037
5,475
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$12,657
$12,807**
(1.2)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share
$  13.81
$  13.66**
1.1%
*	 See page 41 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) earnings.
**	Recast to reflect adoption of FASB guidance on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit costs.
+ 	Includes charges of $2.0 billion in 2018 and $5.5 billion in 2017 associated with U.S. tax reform.
NM—Not meaningful
In 2018, the company reported $79.6 billion in revenue and $8.7 
billion in income from continuing operations, which included 
charges of $2.0 billion associated with U.S. tax reform. Operating 
(non-GAAP) earnings were $12.7 billion, which excludes the tax 
reform charges. Diluted earnings per share from continuing 
operations were $9.51 as reported and $13.81 on an operating 
(non-GAAP) basis. The company generated $15.2 billion in cash 
from operations, $11.9 billion in free cash flow and delivered 
shareholder returns of $10.1 billion in gross common stock 
repurchases and dividends.
Total consolidated revenue in 2018 increased 0.6 percent as 
reported and was flat adjusted for currency compared to the prior 
year. Cognitive Solutions increased 0.2 percent as reported and 
was essentially flat adjusted for currency. Solutions Software 
grew 0.8 percent as reported (essentially flat adjusted for 
currency), while Transaction Processing Software declined 1.2 
percent as reported (2 percent adjusted for currency). Global 
Business Services (GBS) increased 2.9 percent as reported and 
2 percent adjusted for currency led by growth in Consulting. 
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms (TS&CP) grew 0.5 
percent as reported and was flat adjusted for currency, with 
growth in Infrastructure Services and Integration Software 
offset by declines in Technical Support Services. Within TS&CP, 
there was continued strong growth in cloud revenue which 
increased 23 percent year to year as reported and adjusted 
for currency. Systems decreased 2 percent as reported and 
adjusted for currency, with IBM Z declining year to year reflecting 
product cycle dynamics. Storage Systems also decreased in a 
competitive environment with ongoing pricing pressures, while 
Power Systems grew as reported and adjusted for currency, 
with strong performance in Power9-based processors and Linux 
throughout the year.
In 2018, the company delivered solid strategic imperatives revenue 
growth, generating $39.8 billion of revenue and growing 9 percent 
as reported and adjusted for currency, with double-digit growth 
in cloud and security. Cloud revenue of $19.2 billion increased 12 
percent as reported and adjusted for currency, with as-a-Service 
revenue up 22 percent as reported and adjusted for currency. The 
annual exit run rate for as-a-Service revenue increased to $12.2 
billion in 2018 compared to $10.3 billion in 2017.
From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue declined 
1.7 percent year to year as reported (1 percent adjusted for 
currency) with a decline in the U.S. of 2.4 percent. Europe/Middle 
East/Africa (EMEA) increased 4.5 percent (1 percent adjusted 
for currency). Asia Pacific was essentially flat year to year as 
reported and adjusted for currency.
The consolidated gross margin of 46.4 percent decreased 0.3 
points year to year and reflects the impacts of portfolio mix and 
investment, partially offset by benefits from productivity and 
improving services margins through the year. The operating (non-
GAAP) gross margin of 46.9 percent decreased 0.4 points versus 
the prior year primarily driven by the same factors. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
21
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) increased 0.2 percent in 
2018 compared to the prior year. The year-to-year performance 
was driven by decline in intellectual property (IP) income (2 
points) and a higher level of workforce rebalancing charges 
(1 point), offset by continued focus on efficiency resulting in 
lower spending (3 points). Total operating (non-GAAP) expense 
and other (income) decreased 0.4 percent year to year, driven 
primarily by the same factors.
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $11.3 billion 
decreased 0.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was 14.3 percent, 
a decrease of 0.2 points versus 2017. The continuing operations 
effective tax rate for 2018 was 23.1 percent, including charges 
of $2.0 billion associated with U.S. tax reform. This is compared 
to an effective tax rate of 49.5 percent in 2017 which included 
a $5.5 billion charge associated with U.S. tax reform. Without 
these impacts, the continuing operations tax rate for 2018 would 
have been 5.4 percent, compared to a 2017 rate of 1.5 percent. 
Net income of $8.7 billion increased 51.7 percent year to year 
as a result of the lower tax reform charges in 2018. Operating 
(non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations of 
$13.7 billion was flat year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) 
pre-tax margin from continuing operations decreased 0.1 points 
to 17.3 percent. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing 
operations of $12.7 billion decreased 1.2 percent with an 
operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing operations 
of 15.9 percent, down 0.3 points year to year. The operating 
(non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations in 2018 
was 7.9 percent, compared to 6.8 percent in the prior year. 
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $9.51 in 
2018 increased 54.9 percent year to year, which included lower 
year-to-year charges associated with U.S. tax reform. Operating 
(non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $13.81 increased 
1.1 percent versus 2017. In 2018, the company repurchased 
32.9 million shares of its common stock at a cost of $4.4 billion 
and had $3.3 billion remaining in the current share repurchase 
authorization at December 31, 2018.
At December 31, 2018, the balance sheet remains strong and 
the company continues to be committed to maintaining a strong 
investment grade rating. Cash, restricted cash and marketable 
securities at December 31, 2018 were $12.2 billion, a decrease 
of $0.6 billion from December 31, 2017. Key drivers in the 
balance sheet and total cash flows were:
Total assets decreased $2.0 billion (increased $1.2 billion 
adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2017 driven by:
•	 A decline in receivables of $1.6 billion ($0.6 billion adjusted 
for currency) driven by a decline in trade receivables of  
$1.5 billion, and
•	 A decrease in net intangibles and goodwill of $1.2 billion 
($0.6 billion adjusted for currency) resulting from currency 
impacts and intangibles amortization; partially offset by
•	 An increase in deferred costs of $1.0 billion ($1.2 billion 
adjusted for currency) driven primarily by capitalized sales 
commissions costs due to the adoption of the new revenue 
standard. 
Total liabilities decreased $1.2 billion (increased $1.3 billion 
adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2017 driven by:
•	 Decreases in total debt ($1.0 billion), deferred income  
($0.7 billion) and compensation and benefits ($0.5 billion); 
partially offset by 
•	 Increases in taxes ($1.1 billion).
Total equity of $16.9 billion decreased $0.8 billion from 
December 31, 2017 as a result of:
•	 Decreases from dividends ($5.7 billion) and treasury stock 
($4.6 billion) primarily due to share repurchases; partially 
offset by 
•	 Increases from net income ($8.7 billion) and the transition 
adjustment related to the adoption of the new revenue 
standard ($0.6 billion). 
The company generated $15.2 billion in cash flow provided 
by operating activities, a decrease of $1.5 billion compared to 
2017, driven primarily by a decrease in cash provided by financing 
receivables ($0.8 billion), a decrease in cash sourced from sales 
cycle working capital ($0.2 billion) and an increase in cash 
income tax payments ($0.1 billion). Net cash used in investing 
activities of $4.9 billion was $2.2 billion lower than the prior year, 
primarily driven by decreases in cash used for net non-operating 
receivables ($1.5 billion) and lower net purchases of marketable 
securities and other investments ($0.5 billion). Net cash used 
in financing activities of $10.5 billion increased $4.1 billion 
compared to 2017, driven primarily by a decrease in net cash 
sourced from debt transactions ($3.7 billion), with a lower level 
of issuances and a higher level of maturities in the current year. 
In January 2019, the company disclosed that it is expecting 
GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations of at least 
$12.45 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at least $13.90 per 
diluted share for 2019. The company expects free cash flow to be 
approximately $12 billion in 2019. Free cash flow realization is 
expected to be approximately 100 percent of GAAP net income. 
Refer to page 61 in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section 
for additional information on this non-GAAP measure. Refer to 
the Looking Forward section on pages 59 and 60 for additional 
information on the company’s expectations.


===== PAGE 23 =====
22
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the 
SEC on February 26, 2019 for Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
The company creates value for clients by providing integrated 
solutions and products that leverage: data, information 
technology, deep expertise in industries and business processes, 
with trust and security and a broad ecosystem of partners and 
alliances. IBM solutions typically create value by enabling new 
capabilities for clients that transform their businesses and 
help them engage with their customers and employees in new 
ways. These solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio 
of consulting and IT implementation services, cloud, digital 
and cognitive offerings, and enterprise systems and software 
which are all bolstered by one of the world’s leading research 
organizations. 
IBM Strategy
IBM’s strategy is wholly focused on the needs of its clients. IBM 
is a technology company, but first and foremost it is an enterprise 
company. IBM serves enterprises of all sizes, and IBM’s longest-
standing clients are leaders in their industries—the world’s 
leading financial services institutions, airlines, manufacturers, 
consumer goods and retail companies. IBM’s mission is to help 
its clients transform their companies and lead in their industries.
One of the biggest priorities for IBM clients is to derive 
competitive advantage through insights and the latest digital 
technologies. Better insight about the wants and needs of 
their customers will help them distinguish themselves in the 
marketplace. Data-driven insight will also influence how they 
design and produce their own products, as well as help them 
identify opportunities in new markets.
However, most companies are harnessing only a small percent 
of the valuable data they collect. As IBM clients embark on 
the next chapter of their digital journey, the proper collection, 
use, safeguarding and management of data is of paramount 
importance. Choosing the right digital technologies to analyze 
the data is also necessary. 
IBM helps clients harness the power of their data through 
technologies like AI, analytics and blockchain; on a hybrid cloud 
that connects data across traditional and new environments; with 
services that put a client’s data and insight to use in and for their 
business. Underpinning all of this, IBM safeguards client data 
with world-class technologies and approaches to security.
By reinventing themselves digitally around insight, clients 
become what IBM calls Cognitive Enterprises. 
What IBM Brings to Clients 
Businesses are choosing IBM because they want to partner 
with a company that can uniquely integrate three core 
capabilities:
1.	 They want the most innovative technology, like AI, 
blockchain, cybersecurity and quantum delivered in a  
hybrid cloud environment.
2.	 They want industry expertise—from a partner that deeply 
understands their industry and can apply innovation to  
their business processes to drive transformation and 
competitive advantage. 
3.	 And, finally, they want a total commitment to trust and 
security. Clients want to partner with a company that will 
protect their valuable data and insights, and one that 
develops and deploys new innovations with a commitment  
to do so responsibly.
IBM is unique in that it can integrate all three core capabilities 
for clients.
Innovative Technology 
IBM has a long history of bringing innovative technology to the 
world. For 26 years, IBM has led the world in U.S. patents; six 
IBMers are Nobel Laureates; and IBM engineers have developed 
innumerable first-of-its-kind products and services. Current 
examples of IBM’s innovative technology include:
•	 Analytics and AI: IBM’s long-standing leadership in 
managing and extracting insights from data starts with a 
portfolio of analytics and database offerings. A few years 
ago, IBM brought AI into the mainstream with the Watson 
platform, which to date has been the foundation of many 
Enterprise AI implementations in production. Recently, IBM 
augmented its Watson platform with a set of AI tools that 
enable clients to trace the origins of the data their AI models 
use, explain what is behind their recommendations and 
ensure that bias has not crept into results. These  
innovations are making AI more consumable by everyday 
users—not just data scientists.
•	 Security: Businesses built around data require an 
unparalleled level of data security. IBM is the leader in 
information security for enterprises—with leadership in  
both security software and services. Security is embedded 
inside all of IBM’s products and services. For example, 
IBM Z offers pervasive security by building data encryption 
directly in its computing processor. In addition, IBM’s 
services businesses are world class in embedding security 
into the solutions they build and run for IBM clients.
•	 Blockchain is an exciting technology that is just beginning to 
transform business processes. IBM’s platform has been 
rated number one by leading analyst firms such as Juniper 
Research and Everest Group. Blockchain technology 
enables multiple parties to conduct business with each 
other on a single, unified distributed system, eliminating the 
costly and time-consuming hand-offs of fragmented 
systems. IBM is deploying blockchain technology with 
clients to transform how global trade is transacted, how 
food safety is tracked and how supply chains are managed.


===== PAGE 24 =====
23
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
•	 Cloud: Enterprise clients are in the very early stages of  
the move to cloud. IBM estimates that only 20 percent of 
workloads have moved to the cloud—with work ahead for 
the remaining 80 percent. The first part was to move 
business workloads that exist as a layer over core 
processes. The hard part is ahead: moving the mission-
critical systems that run banking, retail, telecom and other 
industries. Some of these workloads will remain in 
traditional IT systems, some will move to a private cloud 
inside the safety of a client’s firewall, others will move to 
public clouds, and some will surge between all of these. 
Wherever a workload may reside, it will need to share  
its data across environments. All of this requires an 
approach that is open, highly interoperable between 
environments, and even interoperable between different 
public clouds. This is what IBM has long called hybrid 
cloud—and this describes the solution for the 80 percent of 
the workloads that is to come. With in-depth experience 
across all three environments, IBM brings the strongest 
hybrid cloud solution to the market for enterprises—which 
will be strengthened through the acquisition of Red Hat.
Industry Expertise 
Changing a business requires in-depth understanding of how a 
business works and how technology can make it work differently. 
IBM brings both industry expertise and innovative technology to 
clients through the IBM services and products businesses. This 
combination makes IBM unique and essential.
A few examples of this capability are highlighted below: 
•	 Global Business Services: the IBM GBS business is one of 
the world’s largest professional services businesses. Its 
mission is to help clients along the journey to becoming a 
Cognitive Enterprise.
•	 Global Technology Services: the IBM GTS business runs 
some of the world’s largest data centers—and thereby  
some of the world’s most mission-critical workflows and 
franchises. GTS helps clients along their journey to  
the hybrid cloud—leveraging the best of their existing 
systems in the context of the regulatory, security and 
workflow of their industry. 
•	 Industry and Domain-Specific Solutions: augmenting IBM’s 
services businesses are software and solutions designed for 
specific industries and domains. For example:
	
Health: IBM has become a leader in applying advanced 
digital technologies to healthcare, including the 
application of AI and data analytics to the diagnosis and 
treatment of patients, bringing smart decisions to Health 
Care payers, and helping Life Sciences companies 
develop innovative products and services.
	
Financial Services: IBM is a leading provider in the 
Financial Services industry; with IBM’s Promontory 
Financial Group, a leading advisor in Financial Regulation 
and Compliance, IBM offers an advanced set of solutions 
for managing Risk and Compliance, a critical workflow in 
the Financial Services industry.
Trust and Security 
Data and AI—together, they are both the opportunity and 
the issue of current times. They can make the world a better, 
healthier and more productive place; but only if businesses and 
consumers trust the companies putting data and AI to work.
IBM is a 107-year old business—and the reason it has been 
successful for so long is because it has earned the trust of 
its clients. IBM has not only followed guidelines around the 
responsible handling of data and the stewardship of new 
technology, but created them, published them, and invited others 
to adopt similar commitments. IBM’s principles make clear that: 
•	 The purpose of new technologies is to augment—not 
replace—human expertise;
•	 Data and insights derived from AI belong to their owners 
and creators (not their IT partners); and,
•	 New technologies must be transparent and explainable.
There are many companies in the IT industry who bring 
technology products to the marketplace. Many bring technology 
services to the marketplace. A few companies do both, but no one 
can do it as well as IBM when it comes to meeting the needs of 
clients. By bringing together technology and workflow, combining 
it with industry expertise, innovation and deployment, IBM helps 
clients and industries truly transform themselves.
This is what truly sets IBM apart. 
Business Model
The company’s business model is built to support two principal 
goals: helping enterprise clients to move from one era to the 
next by bringing together innovative technology and industry 
expertise, and providing long-term value to shareholders. The 
business model has been developed over time through strategic 
investments in capabilities and technologies that have long-term 
growth and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver 
to clients.
The company’s global capabilities include services, software, 
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad 
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide 
integrated solutions and platforms to the company’s clients.
The business model is dynamic, adapting to the continuously 
changing industry and economic environment, including the 
company’s transformation into cloud and as-a-Service delivery 
models. The company continues to strengthen its position 
through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-
value areas, broadening its industry expertise and integrating AI 
into more of what the company offers. In addition, the company 
is transforming into a more agile enterprise to drive innovation 
and speed, as well as helping to drive productivity, which 
supports investments for participation in markets with significant 


===== PAGE 25 =====
24
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
long-term opportunity. The company also regularly evaluates its 
portfolio and proactively maximizes shareholder value of non-
strategic assets by bringing products to end of life, engaging in 
IP partnerships or executing divestitures. 
This business model, supported by the company’s financial 
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash 
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.
Business Segments and Capabilities
The company’s major operations consist of five business 
segments: Cognitive Solutions, Global Business Services, 
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, Systems and Global 
Financing.
Cognitive Solutions comprises a broad portfolio of primarily 
software capabilities that help IBM’s clients to identify actionable 
new insights and inform decision-making for competitive 
advantage. Leveraging IBM’s research, technology and industry 
expertise, this business delivers a full spectrum of capabilities, 
from descriptive, predictive and prescriptive analytics to 
artificial intelligence. Cognitive Solutions includes Watson, the 
first enterprise AI platform that specializes in driving value and 
knowledge from the 80 percent of the world’s data that sits 
behind company firewalls. It enables businesses to reimagine 
their workflows across a variety of industries and professions 
and gives organizations complete control of their insights, data, 
training and IP.
Additionally, Cognitive Solutions includes the new Watson 
OpenScale technology—a first of a kind, open technology 
platform that addresses key challenges of AI adoption. It enables 
companies to manage AI transparently throughout the full AI 
lifecycle, irrespective of where their AI applications were built 
or in which environment they currently run. 
IBM’s solutions are provided through the most contemporary 
delivery methods including through cloud environments and 
as-a-Service models. Cognitive Solutions consists of Solutions 
Software and Transaction Processing Software.
Cognitive Solutions Capabilities
Solutions Software: provides the basis for many of the 
company’s strategic areas. IBM has established the world’s 
deepest portfolio of enterprise AI, including analytics and data 
management platforms, cloud data services, talent management 
solutions, and solutions tailored by industry. Watson Platform, 
Watson Health and Watson Internet of Things (IoT) are certain 
capabilities included in Solutions Software. IBM’s world-class 
security platform weaves in AI to deliver integrated security 
intelligence across clients’ entire operations, including their 
cloud, applications, networks and data, helping them to prevent, 
detect and remediate potential threats.
Transaction Processing Software: includes software that 
primarily runs mission-critical systems in industries such as 
banking, airlines and retail.
Global Business Services (GBS) provides clients with consulting, 
application management and business process services. 
These professional services deliver value and innovation to 
clients through solutions which leverage industry, technology 
and business strategy and process expertise. GBS is the 
digital reinvention partner for IBM clients, combining industry 
knowledge, functional expertise, and applications with the power 
of business design and cognitive and cloud technologies. The 
full portfolio of GBS services is backed by its globally integrated 
delivery network and integration with technologies, solutions and 
services from IBM units including IBM Watson, IBM Cloud, IBM 
Research, and Global Technology Services.
In 2018, focused on digital reinvention, GBS assisted clients on 
their journeys to becoming Cognitive Enterprises, helping them 
engage their customers with new digital value propositions, 
transform workflows using AI, and build hybrid, open cloud 
infrastructures. This was delivered by the operating model 
rolled out in 2017—Digital Strategy and iX, Cognitive Process 
Transformation and Cloud Application Innovation, cross industry 
and globally.
GBS Capabilities
Consulting: provides business consulting services focused on 
bringing to market solutions that help clients shape their digital 
blueprints and customer experiences, define their cognitive 
operating models, unlock the potential in all data to improve 
decision-making, set their next-generation talent strategies and 
create new technology architectures in a cloud-centric world.
Application Management: delivers system integration, 
application management, maintenance and support services for 
packaged software, as well as custom and legacy applications. 
Value is delivered through advanced capabilities in areas such 
as security and privacy, application testing and modernization, 
cloud application migration and automation.
Global Process Services (GPS): delivers finance, procurement, 
talent and engagement, and industry-specific business process 
outsourcing services. These services deliver improved business 
results to clients through a consult-to-operate model which 
includes the strategic change and/or operation of the client’s 
processes, applications and infrastructure. GBS is redefining 
process services for both growth and efficiency through the 
application of the power of cognitive technologies like Watson, 
as well as the IoT, blockchain and deep analytics.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms (TS&CP) provides 
compre­hensive IT infrastructure and platform services that 
create business value for clients. Clients gain access to leading-
edge, high-quality services, flexibility and economic value. This is 
enabled through leverage of insights drawn from IBM’s decades 
of experience across thousands of engagements, the skills of 
practitioners, advanced technologies, applied innovation from 
IBM Research and global scale.


===== PAGE 26 =====
25
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
TS&CP Capabilities
Infrastructure Services: delivers a portfolio of project services, 
managed and outsourcing services, and cloud-delivered services 
focused on clients’ enterprise IT infrastructure environments 
to enable digital transformation and deliver improved quality, 
flexibility and economic value. The portfolio includes a 
comprehensive set of hybrid cloud services and solutions to 
assist enterprise clients in building and running contemporary IT 
environments. These offerings integrate long-standing expertise in 
service management and technology with the ability to utilize the 
power of new technologies, drawn from across IBM’s businesses 
and ecosystem partners. The portfolio is built using the IBM 
Services Platform with Watson, designed to augment human 
intelligence with cognitive technologies, and addresses hybrid 
cloud, digital workplace, business resiliency, network, managed 
applications, cloud and security. The company’s capabilities, 
including IBM Cloud, cognitive computing and hybrid cloud 
implementation, provide high-performance, end-to-end innovation 
and an improved ability for clients to achieve business objectives.
Technical Support Services: delivers comprehensive support 
services to maintain and improve the availability of clients’ IT 
infrastructures. These offerings include maintenance for IBM 
products and other technology platforms, as well as open source 
and vendor software and solution support, drawing on innovative 
technologies and leveraging the IBM Services Platform with 
Watson capabilities.
Integration Software: delivers industry-leading hybrid cloud 
solutions that empower clients to achieve rapid innovation, 
hybrid integration and process transformation with choice 
and consistency across public, dedicated and local cloud 
environments, leveraging the IBM Platform-as-a-Service 
solution. Integration Software offerings and capabilities help 
clients address the digital imperatives to create, connect and 
optimize their applications, data and infrastructure on their 
journey to become cognitive businesses.
Systems provides clients with innovative infrastructure 
platforms to help meet the new requirements of hybrid cloud 
and enterprise AI workloads. More than one-third of Systems 
Hardware’s server and storage sales transactions are through the 
company’s business partners, with the balance direct to end-user 
clients. IBM Systems also designs advanced semiconductor and 
systems technology in collaboration with IBM Research, primarily 
for use in the company’s systems.
Systems Capabilities
Systems Hardware: includes IBM’s servers: IBM Z, Power 
Systems and Storage Systems.
Servers: a range of high-performance systems designed to 
address computing capacity, security and performance needs 
of businesses, hyperscale cloud service providers and scientific 
computing organizations. The portfolio includes IBM Z, a trusted 
enterprise platform for integrating data, transactions and insight, 
and Power Systems, a system designed from the ground up for 
big data and enterprise AI, optimized for hybrid cloud and Linux, 
and delivering open innovation with OpenPOWER.
Storage Systems: data storage products and solutions that 
allow clients to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex 
volumes of digital information and to fuel data-centric cognitive 
applications. These solutions address critical client requirements 
for information retention and archiving, security, compliance and 
storage optimization, including data deduplication, availability 
and virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of flash 
storage, disk and tape storage solutions.
Operating Systems Software: IBM  Z operating system 
environments include z/OS, a security-rich, high-performance 
enterprise operating system, as well as Linux. Power Systems 
offers a choice of AIX, IBM i or Linux operating systems. These 
operating systems leverage POWER architecture to deliver 
secure, reliable and high performing enterprise-class workloads 
across a breadth of server offerings.
Global Financing encompasses two primary businesses: 
financing, primarily conducted through IBM Credit LLC (IBM 
Credit), and remanufacturing and remarketing. IBM Credit is 
a wholly owned subsidiary of IBM that accesses the capital 
markets directly. IBM Credit, through its financing solutions, 
facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of information technology 
systems, software and services in the areas where the company 
has expertise. The financing arrangements are predominantly 
for products or services that are critical to the end users’ 
business operations. The company conducts a comprehensive 
credit evaluation of its clients prior to extending financing. As 
a captive financier, Global Financing has the benefit of both 
deep knowledge of its client base and a clear insight into the 
products and services financed. These factors allow the business 
to effectively manage two of the major risks associated with 
financing, credit and residual value, while generating strong 
returns on equity. Global Financing also maintains a long-term 
partnership with the company’s clients through various stages 
of the IT asset life cycle—from initial purchase and technology 
upgrades to asset disposition decisions. 
Global Financing Capabilities
Client Financing: lease, installment payment plan and loan 
financing to end users and internal clients for terms up to seven 
years. Assets financed are primarily new and used IT hardware, 
software and services where the company has expertise. Internal 
financing is predominantly in support of Technology Services & 
Cloud Platforms’ long-term client service contracts. All internal 
financing arrangements are at arm’s-length rates and are based 
upon market conditions.
Commercial Financing: short-term working capital financing 
to suppliers, distributors and resellers of IBM and Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) products and services. The OEM 
portion will begin winding down starting in the second quarter of 
2019 and continuing throughout the calendar year. Commercial 
Financing also includes internal activity where Global Financing 
factors a selected portion of the company’s accounts receivable 
primarily for cash management purposes, at arm’s-length rates. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
26
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: assets include used 
equipment returned from lease transactions, or used and surplus 
equipment acquired internally or externally. These assets may 
be refurbished or upgraded, and sold or leased to new or existing 
clients both externally or internally. Externally remarketed 
equipment revenue represents sales or leases to clients and 
resellers. Internally remarketed equipment revenue primarily 
represents used equipment that is sold internally to Systems 
and Technology Services & Cloud Platforms. Systems may also 
sell the equipment that it purchases from Global Financing to 
external clients.
IBM Worldwide Organizations
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s 
delivery of value to its clients:
•	 Global Markets
•	 Research, Development and Intellectual Property
Global Markets
IBM has a global presence, operating in more than 175 countries 
with a broad-based geographic distribution of revenue. The 
company’s Global Markets organization manages IBM’s global 
footprint, working closely with dedicated country-based 
operating units to serve clients locally. These country teams 
have client relationship managers who lead integrated teams of 
consultants, solution specialists and delivery professionals to 
enable clients’ growth and innovation. 
By complementing local expertise with global experience and 
digital capabilities, IBM builds deep and broad-based client 
relationships. This local management focus fosters speed 
in supporting clients, addressing new markets and making 
investments in emerging opportunities. The Global Markets 
organization serves clients with expertise in their industry as 
well as through the products and services that IBM and partners 
supply. IBM continues to expand its reach to new and existing 
clients through digital marketplaces, digital sales and local 
Business Partner resources.
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differentiate 
the company from its competitors. IBM annually invests 
approximately 7 percent of total revenue for R&D, focusing on 
high-growth, high-value opportunities. IBM Research works 
with clients and the company’s business units through global 
labs on near-term and mid-term innovations. It delivers many 
new technologies to IBM’s portfolio every year and helps clients 
address their most difficult challenges. IBM Research scientists 
are conducting pioneering work in artificial intelligence, quantum 
computing, blockchain, security, cloud, nanotechnology, silicon 
and post-silicon computing architectures and more—applying 
these technologies across industries including financial services, 
healthcare, blockchain and IoT.
In 2018, for the 26th consecutive year, IBM was awarded more 
U.S. patents than any other company. IBM’s 9,100 patents 
awarded in 2018 represent a diverse range of inventions in 
strategic growth areas for the company, including more than 
3,000 patents related to work in artificial intelligence, cloud, 
cybersecurity and quantum computing.
The company actively continues to seek IP protection for its 
innovations, while increasing emphasis on other initiatives 
designed to leverage its IP leadership. Some of IBM’s 
technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM 
products, while others are licensed and may be used in IBM 
products and/or the products of the licensee. As part of its 
business model, the company licenses certain of its intellectual 
property assets, which constitute high-value technology, but 
may be applicable in more mature markets. The licensee drives 
the future development of the IP and ultimately expands the 
customer base. This generates IP income for the company both 
upon licensing, and with any ongoing royalty arrangements 
between it and the licensee. While the company’s various 
proprietary IP rights are important to its success, IBM believes its 
business as a whole is not materially dependent on any particular 
patent or license, or any particular group of patents or licenses. 
IBM owns or is licensed under a number of patents, which vary 
in duration, relating to its products.


===== PAGE 28 =====
27
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2018 versus 2017 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s 
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to 
reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions
$18,481
$18,453 
0.2%
(0.4)%
Gross margin
77.5%
78.6%*
(1.1) pts.
Global Business Services
16,817
16,348
2.9%
2.0%
Gross margin
26.7%
24.9%*
1.7 pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
34,462
34,277
0.5%
(0.1)%
Gross margin
40.5%
40.3%*
0.2 pts.
Systems
8,034
8,194
(2.0)%
(2.3)%
Gross margin
49.8%
53.2%*
(3.4) pts.
Global Financing
1,590
1,696
(6.3)%
(6.5)%
Gross margin
29.1%
29.3%
(0.2) pts.
Other
207
171
21.0%
19.9%
Gross margin
(140.7)%
(173.9)%*
33.2 pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$79,591
$79,139 
0.6%
0.0%
Total consolidated gross profit
$36,936
$36,943*
0.0%
Total consolidated gross margin
46.4%
46.7%*
(0.3) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
372
449
(17.2)%
Retirement-related costs/(income)
—
—*
—%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$37,307
$37,392*
(0.2)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
46.9%
47.2%*
(0.4) pts.
* Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.


===== PAGE 29 =====
28
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Solutions
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Cognitive Solutions external revenue
$18,481
$18,453 
0.2%
(0.4)%
Solutions Software
$12,903
$12,806 
0.8%
0.3%
Transaction Processing Software
5,578
5,647
(1.2)
(1.9)
Cognitive Solutions revenue of $18,481 million was essentially 
flat as reported and adjusted for currency in 2018 compared to 
the prior year. On an as-reported and constant currency basis, 
there was growth in Solutions Software, while Transaction 
Processing Software declined year to year.
Solutions Software revenue of $12,903 million grew 0.8 percent 
as reported (essentially flat adjusted for currency) compared 
to the prior year, led by the company’s analytics and security 
platforms. Within analytics, the company had broad-based 
growth across the Db2 portfolio, including analytics appliances 
and increasing demand for IBM Cloud Private for Data, which 
accelerated in the fourth quarter of 2018. The company 
continued to have solid demand for integrated security and 
services solutions with strong growth in security intelligence and 
orchestration offerings. Across the industry verticals, Watson 
Health and Watson Media & Weather grew revenue as reported 
and adjusted for currency compared to the prior year. Certain 
Solutions Software offerings which address horizontal domains, 
specifically collaboration, commerce and talent, have been 
impacted by secular shifts in the market. In December 2018, 
the company announced its intent to divest its collaboration 
and on-premise marketing and commerce products to HCL. This 
transaction is expected to close by mid-year 2019.
Transaction Processing Software revenue of $5,578 million 
decreased 1.2 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2018 compared to the prior year. There was 
improved revenue performance sequentially in the fourth 
quarter 2018 versus the third quarter 2018 reflecting clients’ 
 
 
 
 
commitment to the company’s platform for the long-term and 
the value it provides in managing mission-critical workloads and 
predictability in spending.
Cognitive Solutions total strategic imperatives revenue of $12.3 
billion grew 3 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for 
currency year to year. Cloud revenue of $2.6 billion grew 2 percent 
as reported and adjusted for currency, with an as-a-Service exit 
run rate of $2.0 billion. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Cognitive Solutions
External gross profit
$14,319
$14,503
(1.3)%
External gross profit 
margin
77.5%
78.6%
(1.1) pts.
Pre-tax income
$  7,154
$  6,795
5.3%
Pre-tax margin
33.8%
32.2%
1.5 pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
Cognitive Solutions gross profit margin decreased 1.1 points to 
77.5 percent in 2018 compared to the prior year. The gross profit 
margin decline was driven by an increasing mix toward SaaS and 
increased royalty cost associated with IP licensing agreements 
in 2018 compared to the prior year.
Pre-tax income of $7,154 million increased 5.3 percent 
compared to the prior year with a pre-tax margin improvement 
of 1.5 points to 33.8 percent, primarily driven by operational 
efficiencies and mix.


===== PAGE 30 =====
29
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Business Services 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for
Currency
Global Business Services external revenue
$16,817
$16,348 
2.9%
2.0%
Consulting
$  7,705
$  7,262
6.1%
5.1%
Global Process Services
1,259
1,265
(0.5)
(0.5)
Application Management
7,852
7,821
0.4
(0.5) 
Global Business Services revenue of $16,817 million increased 2.9 
percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency in 2018 
compared to the prior year. This performance reflects the progress 
the company has made to reposition this business, with strong 
growth in Consulting, led by key offerings in digital and cloud 
application, where the business is bringing together technology 
and industry expertise to help clients on their digital journey.
Consulting revenue of $7,705 million increased 6.1 percent as 
reported (5 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the 
prior year. The improvement was driven by the company’s digital 
strategy, including Digital Commerce and CRM offerings and 
accelerated growth in next generation enterprise applications, 
led by strong demand for consulting and implementation services. 
GPS revenue of $1,259 million was essentially flat year to year 
as reported and decreased 1 percent adjusted for currency. 
GPS performance improved during the second half of 2018 on a 
year-to-year basis as reported and adjusted for currency, as the 
business has been reinventing industry workflows by leveraging 
automation and infusing AI. In January 2019, the company 
announced the intent to divest its Seterus mortgage servicing 
platform business (reported within GPS), which is expected 
to close in the first quarter of 2019. Application Management 
revenue of $7,852 million was flat as reported and declined 1 
percent adjusted for currency compared to 2017. The company 
continues to help clients move to the cloud with offerings such as 
Cloud Migration Factory and cloud application development. The 
business continued to decline in the more traditional application 
management engagements.
Within GBS, total strategic imperatives revenue of $10.8 billion 
grew 10 percent year to year as reported (9 percent adjusted 
for currency). Cloud revenue of $4.7 billion grew 19 percent as 
reported and adjusted for currency, with an as-a-Service exit run 
rate of $2.1 billion.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$4,484
$4,077
10.0%
External gross profit 
margin
26.7%
24.9%
1.7 pts.
Pre-tax income
$1,676
$1,362
23.0%
Pre-tax margin
9.8%
8.2%
1.6 pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
GBS gross profit margin increased 1.7 points to 26.7 percent 
year to year and pre-tax income of $1,676 million increased 
23.0 percent year to year. The pre-tax margin increased 1.6 
points to 9.8 percent. The year-to-year improvements in margins 
and pre-tax income are the result of the shift to higher-value 
offerings, realignment of resources to key skill areas, increased 
productivity and utilization as well as a benefit from currency, 
due to the company’s global delivery model. 


===== PAGE 31 =====
30
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for
Currency
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms external revenue
$34,462
$34,277 
0.5%
(0.1)%
Infrastructure Services
$23,007
$22,690
1.4%
0.7%
Technical Support Services
6,961
7,196
(3.3)
(3.5)
Integration Software
4,493
4,390
2.3
1.9
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue of $34,462 
million increased 0.5 percent as reported (flat adjusted for 
currency) in 2018 compared to the prior year, with growth in 
Infrastructure Services and Integration Software, offset by 
a decline in Technical Support Services. Cloud revenue grew 
double-digits as reported and adjusted for currency. New 
and existing clients are engaging IBM to manage their critical 
infrastructure and deliver innovation, including migrating 
their operations to an open hybrid cloud environment, while 
simultaneously achieving predictable spending.
Infrastructure Services revenue of $23,007 million increased 1.4 
percent as reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) compared 
to the prior year. In Infrastructure Services, the business has 
prioritized the portfolio to deliver high-value solutions that bring 
productivity to clients and allow for expanding workloads, while 
exiting some lower-value offerings. Technical Support Services 
revenue of $6,961 million decreased 3.3 percent as reported 
(3 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. This business 
was impacted by the hardware product cycle dynamics in 2018, 
but continued to grow its multi-vendor services offerings which 
provide clients with an integrated approach by bringing expertise 
and access to different vendor solutions. Integration Software 
revenue of $4,493 million grew 2.3 percent as reported (2 
percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year. There 
was strong double-digit growth year to year in SaaS offerings, 
with continued strong adoption of IBM Cloud Private, which 
helps clients modernize their traditional workloads and provides 
access to over 100 integrated IBM software offerings including 
blockchain, Watson, IoT and analytics.
Within Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, strategic 
imperatives revenue of $12.2 billion increased 18 percent year to 
year as reported and adjusted for currency. Cloud revenue of $8.8 
billion grew 23 percent as reported and adjusted for currency, 
with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $8.0 billion.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Technology Services &  
Cloud Platforms
External Technology 
Services gross profit
$10,307
$10,215
0.9%
External Technology 
Services gross profit 
margin
34.4%
34.2%
0.2 pts.
External Integration 
Software gross profit
$  3,651
$  3,587
1.8%
External Integration 
Software gross profit 
margin
81.3%
81.7%
(0.4) pts.
External total gross profit
$13,958
$13,802
1.1%
External total gross  
profit margin
40.5%
40.3%
0.2 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  3,786
$  4,286
(11.7)%
Pre-tax margin
10.7%
12.3%
(1.5) pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin 
of 40.5 percent was essentially flat year to year. The 2018 
margin reflects benefits from productivity initiatives, including 
automation of delivery processes infused with AI and global 
workforce optimization. Pre-tax income of $3,786 million 
decreased 11.7 percent. The pre-tax margin declined 1.5 points 
year to year to 10.7 percent, reflecting the company’s continued 
investment to expand its go-to-market capabilities and develop 
new offerings for the hybrid market.


===== PAGE 32 =====
31
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Services Backlog and Signings
($ in billions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total backlog
$116.1
$121.0
(4.1)%
(0.6)%
The estimated total services backlog at December 31, 2018 was 
$116 billion, a decrease of 4.1 percent as reported (1 percent 
adjusted for currency).
Total services backlog includes Infrastructure Services, 
Consulting, Global Process Services, Application Management 
and Technical Support Services (TSS). Total backlog is intended 
to be a statement of overall work under contract which is either 
noncancellable, or which historically has very low likelihood 
of termination, given the criticality of certain services to the 
company’s clients. Total backlog does not include as-a-Service 
arrangements that allow for termination under contractual 
commitment terms. Backlog estimates are subject to change and 
are affected by several factors, including terminations, changes 
in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustments for 
revenue not materialized and adjustments for currency.
Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the 
value of a client’s commitment under a services contract. There 
are no third-party standards or requirements governing the 
calculation of signings. The calculation used by management 
involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s 
commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement, 
and the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
Signings include Infrastructure Services, Consulting, GPS and 
Application Management contracts. Contract extensions and 
increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent 
of the incremental new value. TSS is generally not included in 
signings as the maintenance contracts tend to be more steady 
state, where revenues equal renewals. Certain longer-term 
TSS contracts that have characteristics similar to outsourcing 
contracts are included in signings.
Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as 
positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the 
company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be 
recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or 
coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total signings
$44,700
$42,869
4.3%
4.9%
Systems
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for
Currency
Systems external revenue
$8,034
$8,194 
(2.0)%
(2.3)%
Systems Hardware
$6,363
$6,494
(2.0)%
(2.3)%
IBM Z
(5.4)
(5.6)
Power Systems
8.8
8.7
Storage Systems
(5.5)
(5.9)
Operating Systems Software
1,671
1,701
(1.7)
(2.4)
Systems revenue of $8,034 million decreased 2.0 percent year 
to year as reported (2 percent adjusted for currency) driven by 
strong IBM Z performance in the prior year and continuing price 
pressures impacting Storage Systems. Both hardware platforms 
were down year to year for the full year, as reported and adjusted 
for currency. This performance was partially offset by strong 
growth in Power Systems (which grew as reported and adjusted 
for currency in 2018). Systems Hardware revenue of $6,363 
million declined 2.0 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted 
for currency). Operating Systems Software revenue of $1,671 
million decreased 1.7 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) compared to the prior year. 


===== PAGE 33 =====
32
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Within Systems Hardware, IBM Z revenue decreased 5.4 percent 
as reported (6 percent adjusted for currency) year to year, driven 
by the strong performance in 2017 of the z14 mainframe which 
was launched in the third quarter of 2017. The z14 continues to 
be one of the most successful programs within IBM Z history, 
and the company continued to grow the install base by adding 
new clients and new mission-critical workloads to the platform.
Power Systems revenue increased 8.8 percent as reported 
(9 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. As reported and 
adjusted for currency, there was double-digit revenue growth in 
both the low-end and high-end portfolio, mitigated by a decline 
in the midrange products. Overall performance was driven by 
Linux and continued strong adoption of the new POWER9-based 
architecture. In the fourth quarter of 2018, the business released 
the next generation POWER9 processors in the high-end. 
These systems are designed for handling advanced analytics, 
cloud environments and data-intensive workloads in AI, HANA 
and UNIX markets. In 2018, the company delivered the most 
powerful commercially available supercomputers built with 
POWER9 technology to the U.S. Department of Energy labs.
Storage Systems revenue decreased 5.5 percent as reported 
(6 percent adjusted for currency) year to year, with declines in 
midrange products, mitigated by continued strong growth in flash 
array offerings. The storage market remains very competitive, 
with ongoing pricing pressures. The company continues to 
introduce new innovative products with enhanced functionality 
into its products, such as the extension of the next-generation 
NVMe technology into its midrange products in December 2018. 
This technology is expected to be extended across the storage 
portfolio in the first half of 2019.
Within Systems, total strategic imperatives revenue of $4.5 billion 
grew 4 percent year to year as reported (3 percent adjusted for 
currency). Cloud revenue of $3.1 billion declined 10 percent as 
reported and adjusted for currency, reflecting IBM Z product 
cycle dynamics. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Systems
External Systems  
Hardware gross profit
$2,590
$2,893
(10.5)%
External Systems  
Hardware gross  
profit margin
40.7%
44.6%
(3.8) pts.
External Operating  
Systems Software  
gross profit
$1,412
$1,469
(3.9)%
External Operating  
Systems Software  
gross profit margin
84.5%
86.4%
(1.9) pts.
External total  
gross profit
$4,002
$4,362
(8.2)%
External total gross  
profit margin
49.8%
53.2%
(3.4) pts.
Pre-tax income
$   904
$1,128
(19.9)%
Pre-tax margin
10.2%
12.6%
(2.4 ) pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
The Systems gross profit margin decreased 3.4 points to 49.8 
percent in 2018 compared to the prior year. The overall decrease 
year to year was driven by the mix away from IBM Z and margin 
declines in Power Systems and Storage Systems.
Pre-tax income of $904 million declined 19.9 percent and pre-tax 
margin decreased 2.4 points year to year to 10.2 percent driven 
by the strong performance in IBM Z in the prior year, and the 
continued investment in innovation across the Systems portfolio.
Global Financing
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as 
a stand-alone entity. Global Financing facilitates IBM clients’ 
acquisition of information technology systems, software and 
services by providing financing solutions in the areas where the 
company has expertise, while generating strong returns on equity. 
Global Financing also optimizes the recovery of residual values by 
selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment 
to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current 
clients. Sales of equipment include equipment returned at the 
end of a lease, surplus internal equipment and used equipment 
purchased externally. Residual value is a risk unique to the 
financing business and management of this risk is dependent 
upon the ability to accurately project future equipment values 
at lease inception. Global Financing has insight into product 
plans and cycles for the IBM products under lease. Based upon 
this product information, Global Financing continually monitors 
projections of future equipment values and compares them with 
the residual values reflected in the portfolio. 


===== PAGE 34 =====
33
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Operations
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
External revenue
$1,590
$1,696 
(6.3 )%
Internal revenue
1,610
1,471
9.5
Total revenue
$3,200
$3,168 
1.0 %
Pre-tax income
$1,361
$1,278 *
6.5%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
In 2018, Global Financing delivered external revenue of $1,590 
million and total revenue of $3,200 million, with an increase in 
gross margin of 1.0 points. Total pre-tax income of $1,361 million 
increased 6.5 percent compared to 2017 and return on equity 
decreased 2.0 points to 30.8 percent.
In 2018, Global Financing total revenue increased 1.0 percent 
compared to the prior year. This was due to an increase in internal 
revenue of 9.5 percent, driven by an increase in internal financing 
(up 17.6 percent to $424 million), and an increase in internal used 
equipment sales (up 6.8 percent to $1,187 million). External 
revenue declined 6.3 percent due to a decrease in external used 
equipment sales (down 30.8 percent to $366 million), partially 
offset by an increase in external financing (up 4.9 percent to 
$1,223 million).
The increase in external financing revenue was due to the 
increase in the average asset balances, partially offset by lower 
asset yields. The increase in internal financing revenue was 
primarily due to higher asset yields and average asset balances.
Total sales of used equipment represented 48.5 percent and 51.8 
percent of Global Financing’s revenue for the years ended December 31, 
2018 and December 31, 2017, respectively. The decrease in 2018 
was due to lower volume of external used equipment sales, partially 
offset by increases in internal transactions. The gross profit margin 
on used sales was 54.2 percent and 47.4 percent for the years 
ended December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017, respectively. 
The increase in the gross profit margin was driven by a shift toward 
higher margin internal equipment sales.
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 6.5 percent year to 
year primarily driven by an increase in gross profit ($52 million) 
and a decrease in total expense ($32 million). 
The decrease in return on equity from 2017 to 2018 was primarily 
due to lower net income. Refer to page 40 for the details of the 
after-tax income and return on equity calculations.
Total unguaranteed residual value of leases, including operating 
leases, at December 31, 2018 and 2017 was $699 million and 
$724 million, respectively. In addition to the unguaranteed 
residual value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain 
guarantees of the future value of the equipment to be returned 
at end of lease. 
Third-party residual value guarantees increase the minimum 
lease payments as provided for by accounting standards that 
are utilized in determining the classification of a lease as a 
sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating lease. The 
aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees of sales-
type leases were $231 million and $716 million for the financing 
transactions originated during the years ended December 31, 
2018 and December 31, 2017, respectively. In 2018, the residual 
value guarantee program resulted in the company recognizing 
approximately $148 million of revenue that would otherwise have 
been recognized in future periods as operating lease revenue. If 
the company had chosen to not participate in a residual value 
guarantee program in 2018 and prior years, the 2018 impact 
would be substantially mitigated by the effect of prior year 
asset values being recognized as operating lease revenue in 
the current year. The aggregate asset values associated with 
the guarantees of direct financing leases were $163 million and 
$154 million for the financing transactions originated during the 
years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The 
associated aggregate guaranteed future values at the scheduled 
end of lease were $18 million and $45 million for the financing 
transactions originated during the years ended December 31, 
2018 and 2017, respectively. The cost of guarantees was $2 
million and $4 million for the years ended December 31, 2018 
and 2017, respectively.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total revenue
$79,591
$79,139 
0.6%
0.0%
Americas
$36,994
$37,641
(1.7)%
(0.7)%
Europe/Middle East/Africa
25,491
24,397
4.5
1.3
Asia Pacific
17,106
17,102
0.0
(0.4)
* Recast to conform to current period presentation.
Total revenue of $79,591 million in 2018 increased 0.6 percent as reported (flat adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year.


===== PAGE 35 =====
34
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and  
administrative  expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$16,438
$17,100 *
(3.9)%
Advertising and promotional 
expense
1,466
1,445
1.5
Workforce rebalancing 
charges
598
199
202.2
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
435
496
(12.2)
Stock-based compensation
361
384
(6.0)
Bad debt expense
67
55
(20.9)
Total consolidated  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$19,366
$19,680*
(1.6)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(435)
(496)
(12.2)
Acquisition-related charges
(15)
(13)
17.6
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
—
—*
—
Operating (non-GAAP)  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$18,915
$19,170*
(1.3)%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense 
decreased 1.6 percent in 2018 versus 2017, driven primarily by 
the following factors: 
•	 Lower spending (4 points); partially offset by
•	 Higher workforce rebalancing charges (2 points). 
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 1.3 percent 
year to year driven primarily by the same factors.
Bad debt expense increased $12 million in 2018 compared to 
2017. The receivables provision coverage was 1.6 percent at 
December 31, 2018, unchanged from December 31, 2017.
Americas revenue decreased 1.7 percent year to year as reported 
(1 percent adjusted for currency) with a decline in North America, 
as reported and adjusted for currency, and a decline in Latin 
America as reported, but growth adjusted for currency. Within 
North America, the U.S. decreased 2.4 percent and Canada 
increased 1.4 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency). In Latin 
America, Brazil decreased 0.9 percent as reported, but grew 8 
percent adjusted for currency, and Mexico increased 2.8 percent 
(4 percent adjusted for currency).
EMEA revenue increased 4.5 percent as reported and 1 percent 
adjusted for currency. Germany increased 8.0 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency) and the UK increased 6.2 percent (3 
percent adjusted for currency). Spain increased 15.4 percent 
(11 percent adjusted for currency) and France grew 3.4 percent 
as reported, but declined 1 percent adjusted for currency. Italy 
increased 4.0 percent as reported (flat adjusted for currency).
Asia Pacific revenue was essentially flat year to year as reported 
and adjusted for currency. Japan increased 3.0 percent as 
reported (1 percent adjusted for currency). Australia grew 2.0 
percent as reported (5 percent adjusted for currency). China 
decreased 7.8 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and 
India decreased 10.1 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency).
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense 
and other (income)
$25,594
$25,543*
0.2%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(437)
(496)
(11.9)
Acquisition-related charges
(16)
(52)
(70.2)
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
(1,572)
(1,341)*
17.3
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and  
other (income)
$23,569
$23,654*
(0.4)%
Total consolidated 
expense-to-revenue ratio
32.2%
32.3%*
(0.1) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP) 
expense-to-revenue ratio
29.6%
29.9%*
(0.3) pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
For additional information regarding total expense and other 
(income) for both expense presentations, see the following 
analyses by category.


===== PAGE 36 =====
35
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, Development and Engineering Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated  
research, development 
and engineering
$5,379
$5,590
(3.8)%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
—
—
—
Operating (non-GAAP) 
research, development 
and engineering
$5,379
$5,590
(3.8)%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense was 
6.8 percent of revenue in 2018 and 7.1 percent of revenue in 2017. 
RD&E expense decreased 3.8 percent in 2018 versus 2017 
primarily driven by the company’s leveraging of development 
partnerships consistent with its IP licensing strategy and lower 
spending year to year. 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Licensing of intellectual  
property including 
royalty-based fees
$    723
$1,193
(39.4)%
Custom development income
275
252
9.3
Sales/other transfers of 
intellectual property
28
21
35.0
Total
$1,026
$1,466
(30.0)%
Licensing of intellectual property including royalty-based 
fees decreased 39.4 percent in 2018 compared to 2017. The 
company entered into new partnership agreements in 2018, 
which included three transactions with period income greater 
than $100 million. There were also three transactions greater 
than $100 million in 2017. The company licenses IP to partners 
who allocate their skills to extend the value of assets that are 
high value, but may be in mature markets. The timing and amount 
of licensing, sales or other transfers of IP may vary significantly 
from period to period depending upon the timing of licensing 
agreements, economic conditions, industry consolidation and 
the timing of new patents and know-how development.
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction 
losses/(gains)
$  (427)
$   405
NM
(Gains)/losses on  
derivative instruments
434
(341)
NM
Interest income
(264)
(144)
83.7%
Net (gains)/losses from 
securities and  
investment assets
(101)
(20)
404.2
Retirement-related         
costs/(income)
1,572
1,341*
17.3%
Other
(63)
(116)
(46.0)
Total consolidated other  
(income) and expense
$ 1,152
$ 1,125*
2.5%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired 
intangible assets
(2)
—
NM
Acquisition-related 
charges
0
(39)
(99.2)%
Non-operating retirement-
related costs/(income)
(1,572)
(1,341)*
17.3
Operating (non-GAAP) other 
(income) and expense
$  (422)
$   (255)
65.3%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
NM—Not meaningful
Total consolidated other (income) and expense was expense of 
$1,152 million in 2018 compared to $1,125 million in 2017. The 
increase in expense of $28 million year over year was primarily 
driven by:
•	 Higher retirement-related costs ($232 million); partially 
offset by 
•	 Higher interest income ($120 million); and
•	 Higher gains from securities and investment assets  
($81 million).
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense
Total
$723
$615
17.6%
Interest expense increased $108 million compared to 2017. 
Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the related external 
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business. 
Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized interest) in 2018 
was $1,480 million, an increase of $207 million year to year, driven 
by higher average interest rates and higher average debt levels.


===== PAGE 37 =====
36
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Stock-Based Compensation
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $510 million 
decreased $24 million compared to 2017. This was due primarily 
to decreases related to the conversion of stock-based awards 
previously issued by acquired entities ($4 million), performance 
share units ($7 million) and restricted stock units ($13 million). 
Stock-based compensation cost, and the year-to-year change, 
was reflected in the following categories: Cost: $82 million, down 
$9 million; SG&A expense: $361 million, down $23 million; and 
RD&E expense: $67 million, up $8 million.
Retirement-Related Plans
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all 
retirement-related plans. These amounts are included in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, 
SG&A, RD&E) relating to the job function of the plan participants.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Retirement-related 
plans—cost
Service cost
$    431
$    429
0.4%
Multi-employer plans
38
40*
(5.4)
Cost of defined 
contribution plans
1,024
1,046
(2.1)
Total operating costs/
(income)
$ 1,494
$ 1,516*
(1.5)%
Interest cost
$ 2,726
$ 2,961
(7.9)%
Expected return on  
plan assets
(4,049)
(4,346)
(6.8)
Recognized actuarial 
losses
2,941
2,871
2.5
Amortization of prior 
service costs/(credits)
(73)
(88)*
(16.6)
Curtailments/settlements
11
19
(39.9)
Other costs
16
(76)*
NM
Total non-operating  
costs/(income)
$ 1,572
$ 1,341*
17.3%
Total retirement-related  
plans—cost
$ 3,066
$ 2,857
7.3%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
NM—Not meaningful
Total pre-tax retirement-related plan cost increased by $209 
million compared to 2017, primarily driven by lower expected 
return on plan assets ($296 million), an increase in other costs 
($93 million) related to benefits from pension litigation in the prior 
year and an increase in recognized actuarial losses ($70 million); 
partially offset by lower interest costs ($235 million). 
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on 
pages 18 and 19, the company characterizes certain retirement-
related costs as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing 
this characterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2018 
were $1,494 million, a decrease of $22 million compared to 
2017, primarily driven by lower defined contribution plans cost 
($22 million). Non-operating costs of $1,572 million increased 
$232 million in 2018 compared to 2017, driven primarily 
by lower expected return on plan assets ($296 million), an 
increase in other costs ($93 million) related to benefits from 
pension litigation in the prior year and an increase in recognized 
actuarial losses ($70 million); partially offset by lower interest 
costs ($235 million). 
Income Taxes
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2018 was 23.1 
percent, a decrease of 26.4 points versus the prior year. In 2018, 
the accounting for impacts of U.S. tax reform was completed and 
the effects of measurement period adjustments were recognized 
as a net full-year 2018 charge of $2.0 billion (17.7 points). This is 
compared to a charge of $5.5 billion (48.0 points) in 2017 related 
to the impact of the enactment of U.S. tax reform, a year-to-year 
decrease of 30.4 points. Without these impacts, the continuing 
operations tax rate for 2018 would have been 5.4 percent, 
compared to a 2017 rate of 1.5 percent. The adjusted year-to-year 
increase of 3.9 points is primarily driven by the following factors:
•	 A lower benefit year to year in the utilization of foreign  
tax credits of 5.9 points; 
•	 Benefits in 2017 related to an intra-entity asset transfer  
of 5.1 points and the tax write down of an investment  
of 1.7 points; 
•	 A year-to-year increase in tax charges related to 
intercompany payments of 1.3 points; partially offset by
•	 Benefits in 2018 related to domestic and foreign audit 
activity (6.8 points), geographic mix of pre-tax earnings in 
2018 (2.1 points) and the re-assessment of valuation 
allowances (1.2 points).
The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax 
rate was 7.9 percent in 2018, an increase of 1.1 points versus 
2017, principally driven by the same factors described above. 
For more information on U.S. tax reform impacts, see note N, 
“Taxes,” on pages 117 to 119.


===== PAGE 38 =====
37
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the 
weighted-average number of shares of common stock 
outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is 
computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of 
shares of common stock outstanding plus the effect of dilutive 
potential common shares outstanding during the period using the 
treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include 
outstanding stock options and stock awards.
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Earnings per share of 
common stock from 
continuing operations
Assuming dilution
$  9.51*
$  6.14*
54.9%
Basic
$  9.56
$  6.17
54.9%
Diluted operating 
(non-GAAP) 
$13.81
$13.66**
1.1%
Weighted-average shares 
outstanding (in millions)
Assuming dilution
916.3
937.4
(2.2)%
Basic
912.0
932.8
(2.2)%
*	 Includes a charge of $2.0 billion or $2.23 of diluted earnings per share 
in 2018 and $5.5 billion or $5.84 of diluted earnings per share in 2017 
associated with U.S. tax reform.
**Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2018 and 2017 
were 892.5 million and 922.2 million, respectively. The average 
number of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 
21.1 million shares lower in 2018 versus 2017. The decrease was 
primarily the result of the common stock repurchase program.
Financial Position
Dynamics
At December 31, 2018, the company continued to have the 
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. 
Cash, restricted cash and marketable securities at year end 
were $12,222 million. During the year, the company continued to 
manage the investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation 
and liquidity objectives.
Total debt of $45,812 million decreased $1,012 million from prior 
year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at December 31, 
2018 was $2,995 million, an increase of $1,499 million from the 
prior year end. Within total debt, $31,227 million is in support 
of the Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 9 to 1 
ratio. The company continues to have substantial flexibility in 
the debt markets. During 2018, the company completed bond 
issuances totaling $4,000 million, with terms ranging from 2 to 
5 years, and interest rates ranging from 2.65 to 3.60 percent 
depending on maturity. The company has consistently generated 
strong cash flow from operations and continues to have access 
to additional sources of liquidity through the capital markets and 
its Credit Facilities. 
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured 
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at 
December 31. At December 31, 2018, the overall net underfunded 
position was $13,133 million, an increase of $243 million from 
December 31, 2017 driven by lower asset returns, partially 
offset by lower interest cost and an increase in discount rates. 
At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans were 
well funded and the cash requirements related to these plans is 
expected to be approximately $400 million in 2019 and in the 
$350 million to $400 million range in 2020. In 2018, the return 
on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets was (1.8) percent and 
the plan was 104 percent funded at December 31. Overall, global 
asset returns were (1.9) percent and the qualified defined benefit 
plans worldwide were 99 percent funded at December 31, 2018. 
During 2018, the company generated $15,247 million in cash 
from operations, a decrease of $1,477 million compared to 
2017. In addition, the company generated $11,876 million in free 
cash flow, a decrease of $1,117 million versus the prior year. 
See page 61 for additional information on free cash flow. The 
company returned $10,109 million to shareholders in 2018, with 
$5,666 million in dividends and $4,443 million in gross share 
repurchases. In 2018, the company repurchased 32.9 million 
shares and had $3.3 billion remaining in share repurchase 
authorization at year end. The company’s cash generation 
permits the company to invest and deploy capital to areas with 
the most attractive long-term opportunities. 
Global Financing Financial Position Key Metrics
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Cash and cash equivalents
$  1,833
$  2,696
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases (1)
6,924
7,253
Equipment under operating leases— 
external clients (2)
444
477
Client loans
12,802
12,450
Total client financing assets
20,170
20,180
Commercial financing receivables
11,838
11,590
Intercompany financing receivables (3) (4)
4,873
5,056
Total assets
$41,320
$41,096 
Debt
31,227
31,434
Total equity
$  3,470
$  3,484 
(1)	Includes deferred initial direct costs which are eliminated in IBM’s 
consolidated results. 
(2)	Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on 
products purchased from the company’s product divisions which is 
eliminated in IBM’s consolidated results.
(3)	Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results 
and therefore does not appear on page 72.
(4)	These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are 
leveraged at the value in the table using Global Financing debt. ­


===== PAGE 39 =====
38
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2018, substantially all financing assets were 
IT-related assets, and approximately 55 percent of the total 
external portfolio was with investment-grade clients with no 
direct exposure to consumers. This investment-grade percentage 
is based on the credit ratings of the companies in the portfolio. 
Additionally, the company takes actions to transfer exposure to 
third parties. On that basis, the investment-grade content would 
increase by 16 points to 71 percent, a slight increase year to year. 
The company has a long-standing practice of taking mitigation 
actions, in certain circumstances, to transfer credit risk to 
third parties, including credit insurance, financial guarantees, 
nonrecourse borrowings, transfers of receivables recorded as 
true sales in accordance with accounting guidance or sales of 
equipment under operating lease.
IBM Working Capital
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Current assets
$49,146
$49,735 
Current liabilities
38,227
37,363
Working capital
$10,918
$12,373
Current ratio
1.29:1
1.33:1
Working capital decreased $1,454 million from the year-end 
2017 position. The key changes are described below:
Current assets decreased $590 million (increased $1,009 million 
adjusted for currency) due to:
•	 A decline in receivables of $1,067 million ($261 million 
adjusted for currency) driven by a decline in trade 
receivables of $1,496 million; partially offset by
•	 An increase of $519 million ($598 million adjusted for 
currency) in prepaid expenses and other current assets 
primarily due to the reclassification of certain trade 
receivables due to the adoption of the new revenue 
standard.
Current liabilities increased $865 million ($2,076 million adjusted 
for currency) as a result of:
•	 An increase in short-term debt of $3,220 million ($3,284 
million adjusted for currency) primarily as a result of 
reclassifications of $7,252 million from long-term debt to 
reflect upcoming maturities and an increase in commercial 
paper of $1,499 million; partially offset by maturities of 
$5,586 million. The increase in short-term debt was 
partially offset by 
•	 A decrease in taxes payable of $1,173 million ($1,099 
million adjusted for currency) principally driven by the 
resolution in the first-quarter 2018 of certain matters  
related to the ongoing U.S. tax audit of the company’s  
2013-2014 tax returns; and
•	 A decrease in other accrued expenses and liabilities of  
$569 million driven by currency-related decreases of  
$502 million; and
•	 A decrease in deferred income of $387 million ($44 million 
adjusted for currency).
Receivables and Allowances 
Roll Forward of Total IBM Receivables Allowance  
for Credit Losses
($ in millions)
January 1, 
2018
Additions*
Write-offs**
Other+
December 31, 
2018
$668
$66 
$(64 )
$(31 )
$639 
*	 Additions for Allowance for Credit Losses are charged to expense. 
**	Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 88 for 
additional information regarding Allowance for Credit Loss write-offs.
+	 Primarily represents translation adjustments. 
The total IBM receivables provision coverage was 1.6 percent at 
December 31, 2018, unchanged compared to December 31, 2017.
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
The following table presents external Global Financing receivables 
excluding residual values, the allowance for credit losses and 
immaterial miscellaneous receivables:
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Recorded investment (1)
$31,182
$30,892 
Specific allowance for credit losses
220
258
Unallocated allowance for credit losses
72
78
Total allowance for credit losses
292
336
Net financing receivables
$30,890
$30,556 
Allowance for credit losses coverage
0.9%
1.1%
(1)	Includes deferred initial direct costs which are eliminated in IBM’s 
consolidated results.
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved was 
0.9 percent at December 31, 2018, compared to 1.1 percent 
at December 31, 2017. In 2018, write-offs of $41 million 
of receivables previously reserved resulted in a 14 percent 
reduction in the specific reserves, from $258 million at 
December 31, 2017, to $220 million at December 31, 2018. 
See note F, “Financing Receivables,” on pages 103 to 106 
for additional information. Unallocated reserves decreased 
10 percent from $78 million at December 31, 2017, to $72 million 
at December 31, 2018.


===== PAGE 40 =====
39
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables Allowance  
for Credit Losses (included in Total IBM)
($ in millions)
January 1, 
2018
Additions*
Write-offs**
Other+
December 31, 
2018
$336
$14 
$(41 )
$(17 )
$292 
*	 Additions for Allowance for Credit Losses are charged to expense. 
**	Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 88 for 
additional information regarding Allowance for Credit Loss write-offs.
+	 Primarily represents translation adjustments. 
Global Financing’s bad debt expense was $14 million in 2018, 
compared to $17 million in 2017. The year-to-year decrease in 
bad debt expense was primarily due to lower specific reserve 
requirements in 2018.
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Noncurrent assets
$74,236
$75,621
Long-term debt
$35,605
$39,837
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt)
$32,621
$30,432
The decrease in noncurrent assets of $1,385 million (an increase 
of $177 million adjusted for currency) was driven by:
•	 A decrease in net intangibles and goodwill of $1,178 million 
resulting from intangibles amortization and currency 
impacts of $553 million.
Long-term debt decreased $4,232 million ($3,994 million 
adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
•	 Reclassifications to short-term debt of $7,252 million to 
reflect upcoming maturities; and
•	 Early retirement of long-term debt of $942 million; partially 
offset by
•	 Issuances of $4,673 million.
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) increased $2,189 million 
($3,236 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
•	 An increase in other liabilities of $2,209 million, primarily 
driven by the company’s election to include GILTI in 
measuring deferred taxes ($1,927 million).
Debt
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored 
and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and 
liability profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient 
flexibility to access global funding sources as needed. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Total company debt
$45,812
$46,824
Total Global Financing segment debt
$31,227
$31,434
Debt to support external clients
27,536
27,556
Debt to support internal clients
3,690
3,878
Non-Global Financing debt
14,585
15,390
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the 
company’s external client assets, as well as for assets under 
contract by other IBM units. These assets, primarily for TS&CP, 
generate long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global 
Financing asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these TS&CP 
assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global Financing 
asset base.
Non-Global Financing debt of $14,585 million declined $805 
million from prior year-end levels. 
At December 31:
2018
2017
Global Financing debt-to-equity ratio
9.0x
9.0x
The debt used to fund Global Financing assets is composed 
of intercompany loans and external debt. Total debt changes 
generally correspond with the level of client and commercial 
financing receivables, the level of cash and cash equivalents, 
the change in intercompany and external payables and the 
change in intercompany investment from IBM. The terms of 
the intercompany loans are set by the company to substantially 
match the term, currency and interest rate variability underlying 
the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing.
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the 
company’s external client assets, as well as for assets under 
contract by other IBM units. As previously stated, the company 
measures Global Financing as a stand-alone entity, and 
accordingly, interest expense relating to debt supporting Global 
Financing’s external client and internal business is included in 
the “Global Financing Results of Operations” on page 33 and 
in note U, “Segment Information,” on pages 141 to 146. In the 
company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings, the external 
debt-related interest expense supporting Global Financing’s 
internal financing to the company is reclassified from cost of 
financing to interest expense.


===== PAGE 41 =====
40
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Equity
Total equity decreased by $795 million from December 31, 2017 
primarily due to decreases from dividends ($5,666 million), 
and treasury stock ($4,564 million) primarily due to share 
repurchases; partially offset by increases from net income 
($8,728 million) and transition adjustments related to the 
adoption of the new revenue standard ($580 million).
Cash Flow
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and 
financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement 
of Cash Flows on page 73 are summarized in the table below. 
These amounts include the cash flows associated with the Global 
Financing business.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
Net cash provided by/(used in)  
continuing operations
Operating activities
$ 15,247
$16,724
Investing activities
(4,913)
(7,081)*
Financing activities
(10,469)
(6,418)
Effect of exchange rate changes 
on cash, cash equivalents and 
restricted cash
(495)
937
Net change in cash, cash equivalents  
and restricted cash
$     (630)
$  4,161*
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $1,477 
million in 2018 driven by the following key factors:
•	 A decrease in cash provided by financing receivables of 
$764 million driven by an increase in client financing 
receivables due to higher volumes;
•	 A decrease in cash sourced from sales cycle working capital 
of $240 million; and
•	 An increase in cash income tax payments of $148 million.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $2,167 million 
driven by:
•	 A decrease from net non-operating financing receivables of 
$1,525 million; and
•	 A decrease in net purchases of marketable securities and 
other investments of $485 million.
Net cash used in financing activities increased $4,051 million 
driven by the following factors:
•	 A decrease in net cash sourced from debt transactions of 
$3,746 million primarily driven by a lower level of issuances 
and a higher level of maturities in the current year.
Global Financing Return on Equity Calculation
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017+
Numerator
Global Financing after-tax income (1) *
$1,065
$1,114
Denominator
Average Global Financing equity (2) **
$3,460
$3,393
Global Financing return on equity (1)/ (2)
30.8%
32.8%
*	 Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on 
Global Financing’s geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for 
income taxes is determined on a consolidated basis. 
**	Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five 
quarters.
+	 Recast to reflect the adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of 
net benefit cost.


===== PAGE 42 =====
41
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ 
from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on pages 
18 and 19 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2018:
GAAP
Acquisition- 
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement- 
Related 
Adjustments
Tax Reform 
Charges
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$36,936
$ 372 
$       —
$       —
$37,307 
Gross profit margin
46.4%
0.5 pts.
— pts.
— pts.
46.9%
SG&A
$19,366
$(451)
$       — 
$       —
$18,915 
RD&E
5,379
—
—
—
5,379
Other (income) and expense
1,152
(2)
(1,572)
—
(422)
Total expense and other (income)
25,594
(453)
(1,572)
—
23,569
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
11,342
824
1,572
—
13,739
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
14.3%
1.0 pts.
2.0 pts.
— pts.
17.3%
Provision for income taxes*
$  2,619
$ 176 
$    324
$(2,037)
$  1,082 
Effective tax rate
23.1%
(0.1)pts.
(0.3)pts.
(14.8)pts.
7.9%
Income from continuing operations
$  8,723
$ 649 
$ 1,248
$ 2,037
$12,657 
Income margin from continuing operations
11.0%
0.8 pts.
1.6 pts.
2.6 pts.
15.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$    9.51
$0.71 
$   1.36
$   2.23
$  13.81 
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income 
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2017:
GAAP
Acquisition- 
Related 
**      Adjustments
Retirement- 
Related 
Adjustments**
Tax Reform 
Charge
Operating 
(non-GAAP)**
Gross profit
$36,943
$ 449
$       —
$       —
$37,392
Gross profit margin
46.7%
0.6 pts.
— pts.
— pts.
47.2%
SG&A
$19,680
$(509)
$       —
$       —
$19,170
RD&E
5,590
—
—
—
5,590
Other (income) and expense
1,125
(39)
(1,341)
—
(255)
Total expense and other (income)
25,543
(548)
(1,341)
—
23,654
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
11,400
997
1,341
—
13,738
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
14.4%
1.3  pts.
1.7 pts.
— pts.
17.4%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,642
$ 279
$    485
$(5,475)
$     931
Effective tax rate
49.5%
(1.6) pts.
(1.3) pts.
(39.9) pts.
6.8%
Income from continuing operations
$  5,758
$ 718
$    856
$ 5,475
$12,807
Income margin from continuing operations
7.3%
0.9 pts.
1.1 pts.
6.9 pts.
16.2%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$    6.14
$0.77
$   0.91
$   5.84
$  13.66
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income 
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
**	Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit costs.


===== PAGE 43 =====
42
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$21,760
$22,543 
(3.5)%*
Gross profit margin
49.1%
49.0%**
0.1 pts.
Total expense and other (income)
$  6,253
$  6,580**
(5.0)%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio
28.7%
29.2%**
(0.5)pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
$  4,434
$  4,469
(0.8)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations
$  2,481+
$  5,522+
(55.1)
Income/(loss) from continuing operations
$  1,954+
$ (1,053)+
NM
Income/(loss) from continuing operations margin
9.0%
(4.7)%
13.6  pts.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$        (2)
$        (1)
70.7%
Net income/(loss)
$  1,951+
$ (1,054)+
NM
Earnings/(loss) per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution
$    2.15+
$   (1.14)+
NM
Consolidated earnings/(loss) per share—assuming dilution
$    2.15+
$   (1.14)+
NM
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
905.2
924.5
(2.1)%
*	 (1.2) percent adjusted for currency.
**	Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
+	 Includes a charge of $1.9 billion or $2.15 of diluted earnings per share in 2018 and $5.5 billion or $5.90 of diluted earnings per share in 2017 
associated with U.S. tax reform.
NM—Not meaningful
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for the fourth quarter of 2018 and 2017.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income/(loss) as reported
$1,951+
$(1,054 )+
NM
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
(2)
(1)
70.7%
Income/(loss) from continuing operations
1,954+
(1,053)+
NM
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
171
181
(5.3)
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income)
348
174**
99.5
U.S. tax reform charge
1,944
5,475
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$4,417
$ 4,777**
(7.5)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share
$  4.87
$   5.14 **
(5.3)%
*	 See page 47 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) earnings. 
**Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
+ 	Includes a charge of $1.9 billion in 2018 and $5.5 billion in 2017 associated with U.S. tax reform.
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 44 =====
43
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2018, the company reported $21.8 billion 
in revenue and net income from continuing operations of $2.0 
billion, which included a charge of $1.9 billion associated with U.S. 
tax reform. Fourth-quarter operating (non-GAAP) earnings were 
$4.4 billion, which excludes the tax charge. Fourth-quarter diluted 
earnings per share from continuing operations was $2.15 and 
operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share from continuing 
operations was $4.87. The company generated $4.1 billion in cash 
from operations and $6.5 billion in free cash flow in the fourth 
quarter of 2018 and delivered shareholder returns of $3.5 billion 
through gross common stock repurchases and dividends.
In the fourth quarter, revenue decreased 3.5 percent as reported 
and 1 percent adjusted for currency. Cognitive Solutions was 
flat as reported, but grew 2 percent adjusted for currency, 
with growth in Solutions Software, 1 percent as reported and 3 
percent adjusted for currency, led by analytics and AI offerings. 
Transaction Processing Software decreased 1 percent year 
to year as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted for currency 
reflecting strong transactional performance in the quarter. GBS 
increased 4.1 percent as reported, and 6 percent adjusted for 
currency, led by Consulting. There was growth across all GBS 
lines of business as reported and adjusted for currency as the 
company focuses on clients’ digital transformation. Technology 
Services & Cloud Platforms decreased 2.9 percent as reported, 
but was flat adjusted for currency. Infrastructure Services 
declined year to year as reported, but was flat adjusted for 
currency. There was strong growth in signings reflecting demand 
for hybrid cloud implementations and productivity solutions. 
Within TS&CP, Integration Software grew year to year driven by 
continued strong adoption of IBM Cloud Private and improved 
transactional volumes. Systems decreased 21.3 percent as 
reported and 20 percent adjusted for currency, reflecting the 
impact of the IBM Z product cycle dynamics. Growth in Power 
Systems, as reported and adjusted for currency was more than 
offset by declines in IBM Z and Storage Systems.
The company continued to deliver solid strategic imperatives 
revenue growth, generating $11.5 billion of revenue and growing 
3 percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted for currency. 
Strategic imperatives revenue growth was impacted by the IBM Z 
cycle. Excluding IBM Z, strategic imperatives growth would have 
been 9 percent as reported and 11 percent adjusted for currency. 
There was strong growth across analytics, cloud and security, 
excluding IBM Z. Total Cloud revenue of $5.7 billion increased 3 
percent as reported and 6 percent adjusted for currency, and was 
also impacted by the IBM Z cycle. Total Cloud revenue growth, 
excluding IBM Z, would have been 15 percent as reported and 19 
percent adjusted for currency. Cloud-as-a-Service revenue was 
up 18 percent (21 percent adjusted for currency) and the annual 
exit run rate for as-a-Service revenue increased to $12.2 billion in 
the fourth quarter of 2018 compared to $11.4 billion in the third 
quarter of 2018. Analytics revenue of $6.4 billion increased 6 
percent as reported (8 percent adjusted for currency).
From a geographic revenue perspective, Americas decreased 
5.3 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) year to year, with 
declines in the U.S. and Canada, partially offset by growth in Latin 
America. EMEA decreased 1.3 percent as reported, but grew 2 
percent adjusted for currency. Germany grew as reported and 
adjusted for currency and the UK declined as reported, but grew 
adjusted for currency. However, there were declines in France 
and other countries. Asia Pacific decreased 2.7 percent as 
reported (1 percent adjusted for currency). There was growth in 
Japan as reported and adjusted for currency. Australia declined 
as reported, but grew adjusted for currency, and China decreased 
year to year as reported and adjusted for currency. 
The consolidated gross profit margin of 49.1 percent and 
operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of 49.5 percent both 
increased 0.1 points compared to the prior year, with margin 
expansion in the services businesses, offset by a decline in the 
Systems gross margin and an impact from mix. 
Total expense and other (income) decreased 5.0 percent in the 
fourth quarter compared to the prior year. The year-to-year 
decrease was driven by the effects of currency (4 points) and 
lower spending (3 points), partially offset by lower intellectual 
property income (2 points). The expense dynamics reflect the 
company’s focus on driving productivity in the business and new 
ways of working, including using agile methodologies, leveraging 
automation and infusing AI into its processes. Total operating 
(non-GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased 5.2 percent 
year to year driven primarily by the same factors.
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $4.4 billion in the 
fourth quarter decreased 0.8 percent year to year, however, 
the pre-tax margin of 20.4 percent increased 0.6 points. The 
continuing operations effective tax rate for the fourth quarter was 
55.9 percent, which included a $1.9 billion charge related to U.S. 
tax reform. Normalized for this charge, the continuing operations 
effective tax rate for the quarter would have been 12.9 percent. 
Income from continuing operations in the fourth quarter was 
$2.0 billion compared to a loss from continuing operations of 
$1.1 billion in 2017, which included a $5.5 billion charge related 
to U.S. tax reform. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from 
continuing operations of $5.0 billion decreased 1.1 percent year 
to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing 
operations increased 0.5 points to 23.1 percent. Operating 
(non-GAAP) income from continuing operations of $4.4 billion 
decreased 7.5 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax 
rate from continuing operations in the fourth quarter of 2018 was 
12.2 percent versus 6.1 percent in the prior year.
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $2.15 
in the fourth quarter compared to a loss per share of $(1.14) 
in the prior year, with both years including charges associated 
with U.S. tax reform. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per 
share of $4.87 decreased 5.3 percent versus the fourth quarter 
of 2017. In the fourth quarter, the company repurchased 17.0 
million shares of its common stock at a cost of $2.1 billion and 
had $3.3 billion remaining in the share repurchase authorization 
at December 31, 2018. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
44
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2018 versus the fourth quarter of 2017 reportable segment external revenue and 
gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-
length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items. 
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2018
2017
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions
$  5,455
$  5,432
0.4%
2.2%
Gross margin
79.4%
79.2%*
0.2 pts.
Global Business Services
4,322
4,152
4.1%
6.5%
Gross margin
27.6%
24.6%*
3.0 pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
8,929
9,198
(2.9)%
0.0%
Gross margin
42.3%
40.8%*
1.5 pts.
Systems
2,621
3,332
(21.3)%
(20.1)%
Gross margin
50.8%
55.7%*
(4.9) pts.
Global Financing
402
450
(10.7)%
(8.6)%
Gross margin
29.1%
29.5%
(0.3) pts.
Other
32
(20)
NM
NM
Gross margin
(186.2)%
70.2%*
(256.5) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$21,760
$22,543
(3.5)%
(1.2)%
Total consolidated gross profit
$10,687
$11,049*
(3.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin
49.1%
49.0%*
0.1 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
89
99
(10.4)%
Retirement-related costs/(income)
—
—*
—%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$10,776
$11,149*
(3.3)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
49.5%
49.5%*
0.1  pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
NM—Not meaningful
Cognitive Solutions
Cognitive Solutions revenue of $5,455 million grew 0.4 percent 
as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency in the fourth 
quarter of 2018 compared to the prior year, with growth in 
Solutions Software as reported and adjusted for currency. The 
company continued to deliver innovation to clients and scale 
platforms and solutions, driving growth in transactional revenue 
and SaaS signings. Although Transaction Processing Software 
declined as reported, it grew adjusted for currency as the 
business capitalized on a strong pipeline of larger transactions 
driven by client buying cycles.
In the fourth quarter, Solutions Software revenue of $3,823 
million grew 0.9 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for 
currency. Within Solutions Software, high-value areas such as 
analytics and AI drove growth as clients use IBM solutions to 
leverage their data for competitive advantage. Certain analytics 
platforms, such as the Db2 portfolio including analytics 
appliances, and Data Science offerings had broad-based growth 
in the fourth quarter as the company continues to innovate and 
enhance functionality within these offerings. In addition, client 
demand for IBM Cloud Private for Data has accelerated with over 
100 clients adopting the platform in the first six months since its 
launch. There was also solid demand for integrated security and 
services solutions, as well as growth in key areas within Watson 
Health and Watson IoT offerings.
Transaction Processing Software revenue of $1,632 million 
decreased 0.6 percent as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted 
for currency compared to the prior year. There was strong 
transactional performance in the quarter reflecting clients’ 
continued commitment to IBM’s platform for the long-term given 
the value the company provides in managing mission-critical 
workloads and for predictability in spending.
Cognitive Solutions total fourth-quarter strategic imperatives 
revenue of $3.7 billion increased 7 percent as reported and 9 
percent adjusted for currency. Cloud revenue of $0.7 billion grew 
4 percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted for currency, with 
an as-a-Service exit run rate of $2.0 billion.


===== PAGE 46 =====
45
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Solutions gross profit margin of 79.4 percent in the 
fourth quarter of 2018 was essentially flat compared to the prior 
year. Pre-tax income of $2,437 million increased 7.2 percent 
compared to the prior year. The pre-tax margin grew 2.9 points, 
to 40.3 percent driven by operating leverage from growth in 
revenue, operational efficiencies and a mix toward software, 
with continued investment in key strategic areas. 
Global Business Services
Global Business Services revenue of $4,322 million increased 
4.1 percent as reported (6 percent adjusted for currency) in the 
fourth quarter of 2018 compared to the prior year with growth 
as reported and adjusted for currency across all three lines of 
business. GBS’ performance reflects the repositioning of this 
business and the value clients recognize when combining the 
company’s technology and industry expertise as they integrate 
their digital initiatives and internal process transformation.
Consulting revenue of $2,008 million increased 7.5 percent as 
reported (10 percent adjusted for currency). The growth during 
the fourth quarter was led by the company’s digital strategy and 
next generation Enterprise Applications. GPS revenue of $325 
million increased 2.4 percent as reported (5 percent adjusted for 
currency) driven by Cognitive Process Services offerings, which 
leverage automation and AI to reinvent industry workflows. 
Application Management revenue of $1,989 million increased 
1.1 percent as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency). This 
return to growth was driven by strong performance in Cloud 
Migration Factory and cloud application development, while 
traditional application management engagements declined as 
clients continue to migrate to the cloud. The growth also reflects 
the achievement of significant milestones across a few accounts.
GBS strategic imperatives revenue of $2.9 billion grew 11 
percent as reported (14 percent adjusted for currency) year to 
year. Cloud revenue of $1.4 billion grew 30 percent as reported 
(34 percent adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run 
rate of $2.1 billion.
GBS fourth-quarter gross profit margin increased 3.0 points year 
to year to 27.6 percent. Pre-tax income of $566 million increased 
73.4 percent year to year. The pre-tax margin increased 5.2 
points to 12.9 percent. The strong growth in margins reflects 
operating leverage as a result of revenue growth driven by a mix 
to higher-value offerings, as well as benefits from currency, given 
GBS’ global delivery model, and the yield from productivity and 
utilization initiatives. 
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue of $8,929 million 
decreased 2.9 percent as reported, but was flat adjusted for 
currency in the fourth quarter of 2018 compared to the prior year. 
There was continued strong growth in cloud revenue, as new and 
existing clients turn to IBM to manage their critical infrastructure 
and help deliver innovation in an open hybrid cloud environment.
Infrastructure Services revenue of $5,819 million declined 2.9 
percent as reported (flat adjusted for currency) compared to 
the prior year. As the company prioritizes the offerings within its 
portfolio, it is moving away from certain lower-value offerings, 
which will impact revenue performance in the near term, but will 
improve margin growth in the longer term. Technical Support 
Services revenue of $1,722 million decreased 6.4 percent as 
reported (3 percent adjusted for currency), driven primarily by 
the dynamics of the Systems hardware product cycle. Integration 
Software revenue of $1,387 million increased 1.8 percent as 
reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior 
year. There was continued strong adoption of IBM Cloud Private, 
an innovative platform that assists clients in modernizing their 
traditional workloads, and improved transactional performance 
in the quarter. The company continues to enable clients in the 
open hybrid cloud environment through innovative new offerings.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms strategic imperatives 
revenue of $3.2 billion grew 10 percent year to year as reported 
(13 percent adjusted for currency). Cloud revenue of $2.4 billion 
grew 19 percent as reported (22 percent adjusted for currency), 
with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $8.0 billion.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin 
increased 1.5 points to 42.3 percent, driven primarily by service 
delivery improvements resulting from infusing AI and automation 
into business processes and leveraging productivity and talent 
optimization efforts. Pre-tax income of $1,392 million decreased 
3.4 percent. The pre-tax margin of 15.2 percent was flat year to 
year and improved sequentially compared to the third quarter 
of 2018. The company continues to invest in developing new 
offerings to capture the hybrid market opportunities.
Systems
Systems revenue of $2,621 million declined 21.3 percent year to 
year as reported (20 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth 
quarter of 2018. Systems Hardware revenue of $2,175 million 
decreased 24.1 percent as reported (23 percent adjusted for 
currency). The year-to-year revenue decline was driven primarily 
by IBM Z product cycle dynamics and a decrease in Storage 
Systems (as reported and adjusted for currency), partially 
offset by growth in Power Systems (as reported and adjusted 
for currency). Operating Systems Software revenue of $446 
million decreased 4.4 percent as reported (3 percent adjusted 
for currency) compared to the prior year. 
Within Systems Hardware, fourth-quarter IBM Z revenue declined 
45.2 percent as reported (44 percent adjusted for currency) year 
to year as a result of the IBM Z product cycle and strong demand 
for z14 in the prior year. Since launching the z14 six quarters ago, 
this platform continues to track ahead of prior programs, and the 
install base grew as new clients and new workloads continued 
to be added to the platform. Over 55 percent of installed MIPs 
inventory is in emerging workload areas. 


===== PAGE 47 =====
46
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Power Systems revenue grew 8.6 percent as reported (10 percent 
adjusted for currency) year to year driven by Linux and continued 
strong performance of the new POWER9-based processors. The 
low-end and high-end portfolios had double-digit growth in the 
quarter. The release of the next generation POWER9 processor 
was completed during the quarter, with HANA certification 
extended to high-end processors. Power Systems are designed 
for handling advanced analytics and data-intensive workloads in 
cloud environments within AI, HANA and UNIX markets. 
Storage Systems revenue decreased 8.0 percent as reported 
(7 percent adjusted for currency) with declines in midrange, and 
the market remains very competitive with price pressure. There 
was double-digit growth (as reported and adjusted for currency) 
in high-end hardware products and in all-flash array offerings. 
Systems strategic imperatives revenue of $1.6 billion declined 
23 percent year to year as reported (22 percent adjusted for 
currency). Cloud revenue of $1.1 billion decreased 32 percent 
as reported (31 percent adjusted for currency). Both reflected 
IBM Z product cycle dynamics. 
The Systems gross profit margin decreased 4.9 points to 50.8 
percent in the fourth quarter of 2018 compared to the prior 
year. The overall decrease year to year was driven primarily by 
product cycle dynamics with a mix away from IBM Z and margin 
declines in Power Systems and Storage Systems, partially offset 
by Operating Systems Software margin improvement. In the 
fourth quarter of 2018, pre-tax income of $551 million declined 
39.2 percent and pre-tax margin decreased 6.5 points year to 
year to 19.3 percent driven by the strong fourth-quarter 2017 
performance in Systems Hardware. The company continues to 
develop next-generation technology and deliver new innovative 
functionality across its Systems portfolio.
Global Financing
Global Financing revenue of $402 million decreased 10.7 percent 
year to year. Global Financing fourth-quarter pre-tax income 
decreased 27.9 percent to $319 million and the pre-tax margin of 
41.3 percent decreased 3.1 points year to year. The decrease in 
pre-tax income was driven by a decrease in gross profit, partially 
offset by a decrease in SG&A expense and financing receivable 
provisions.
Geographic Revenue
Total revenue of $21,760 million decreased 3.5 percent as 
reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency in the fourth 
quarter of 2018 compared to the prior year. Americas revenue 
of $10,222 million decreased 5.3 percent as reported and 4 
percent adjusted for currency. EMEA fourth-quarter revenue of 
$7,081 million decreased 1.3 percent as reported, but increased 
2 percent adjusted for currency. Asia Pacific revenue of $4,458 
million declined 2.7 percent and 1 percent adjusted for currency.
Within Americas, revenue in the U.S. decreased 7.0 percent year 
to year, driven primarily by the strong IBM Z performance in the 
prior year. Canada decreased 4.1 percent as reported, but was 
flat adjusted for currency. Latin America increased 4.8 percent 
as reported and 17 percent adjusted for currency. Within Latin 
America, Brazil increased 8.1 percent as reported and 20 percent 
adjusted for currency. Mexico increased 12.6 percent as reported 
and 16 percent adjusted for currency.
In the fourth quarter, EMEA revenue performance by country 
varied. The UK decreased 0.9 percent as reported, but increased 
3 percent adjusted for currency. France decreased 14.2 percent 
as reported and 11 percent adjusted for currency. Italy decreased 
1.2 percent as reported, but increased 2 percent adjusted 
for currency. Germany increased 7.9 percent as reported and 
12 percent adjusted for currency. Spain increased 12.7 percent 
as reported and 17 percent adjusted for currency. Russia grew 
4.0 percent as reported and adjusted for currency.
Within Asia Pacific, China decreased 25.0 percent as reported 
and 23 percent adjusted for currency primarily due to strong 
performance in the financial sector in the prior year. India 
decreased 10.4 as reported, but was essentially flat adjusted for 
currency. Australia decreased 1.6 percent as reported, but grew 
5 percent adjusted for currency. Japan increased 5.6 percent as 
reported and 5 percent adjusted for currency. 
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2018
2017*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense 
and other (income)
$6,253
$6,580
(5.0)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(106)
(115)
(7.1)
Acquisition-related 
charges
(13)
(33)
(61.1)
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
(387)
(371)
4.2
Operating (non-GAAP) 
expense and other 
(income)
$5,746
$6,061
(5.2)%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
28.7%
29.2%
(0.5)pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
26.4%
26.9%
(0.5)pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 	
benefit cost.
Total expense and other (income) decreased 5.0 percent in the 
fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 28.7 percent 
compared to 29.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2017. Total 
operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased 
5.2 percent year to year. The year-to-year decrease in total 
expense and other (income) was primarily the result of the effects 
of currency (4 points) and lower spending (3 points), partially offset 
by lower intellectual property income (2 points). The expense 
dynamics reflected the impacts from currency and the continued 
efficiency in the underlying spending, offset by continued 
investment to build and reinvent new solutions and platforms.


===== PAGE 48 =====
47
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cash Flow
The company generated $4.1 billion in cash flow from operating 
activities in the fourth quarter of 2018, a decrease of $1.6 
billion compared to the fourth quarter of 2017, primarily due 
to a decline from financing receivables. Net cash sourced from 
investing activities of $0.5 billion was $4.3 billion higher than 
the prior year’s net use of cash, primarily driven by an increase 
in cash from net proceeds from disposition of marketable 
securities and other investments ($2.3 billion) and an increase 
from net non-operating financing receivables ($1.6 billion). Net 
cash used in financing activities of $4.6 billion increased $3.7 
billion compared to the prior year, primarily driven by higher net 
debt maturities ($2.3 billion) and higher gross common stock 
repurchases ($1.4 billion).
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s 
income statement results as reported under GAAP to its 
operating earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. 
The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as 
presented, may differ from similarly titled measures reported by 
other companies. Refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” 
section on pages 18 and 19 for the company’s rationale for 
presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter 2018:
GAAP
Acquisition- 
Related 
      Adjustments
Retirement- 
Related 
Adjustments
Tax Reform 
Charges
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$10,687
$   89
$     —
$        —
$10,776
Gross profit margin
49.1%
0.4 pts.
— pts.
—pts.
49.5%
SG&A
$  4,701
$(119)
$     —
$        —
$  4,582
RD&E
1,358
—
—
—
1,358
Other (income) and expense
185
(1)
(387) 
—
(203)
Total expense and other (income)
6,253
(119)
(387)
—
5,746
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
4,434
208
387
—
5,030
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
20.4%
1.0 pts.
1.8 pts.
—pts.
23.1%
Provision for income taxes*
$  2,481
$   37
$   39
$(1,944)
$     613
Effective tax rate
55.9%
(1.6)pts. 
(3.5)pts.
(38.7)pts.
12.2%
Income from continuing operations
$  1,954
$ 171
$ 348
$ 1,944
$  4,417
Income margin from continuing operations
9.0%
0.8 pts.
1.6 pts.
8.9pts.
20.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$    2.15
$0.19
$0.38
$    2.15
$    4.87
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied  
to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter 2017:
GAAP
Acquisition- 
Related 
**      Adjustments
Retirement- 
Related 
Adjustments**
Tax Reform 
Charge
Operating 
(non-GAAP)**
Gross profit
$11,049
$   99
$    —
$       —
$11,149
Gross profit margin
49.0%
0.4 pts.
— pts.
— pts.
49.5%
SG&A
$  5,013
$(116)
$    —
$       —
$  4,897
RD&E
1,378
—
—
—
1,378
Other (income) and expense
374
(32)
(371)
—
(30)
Total expense and other (income)
6,580
(148)
(371)
—
6,061
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
  4,469
247
371
—
  5,087
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
19.8%
1.1 pts.
1.6 pts.
— pts.
22.6%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,522
$   67
$ 197
$(5,475)
$     310
Effective tax rate
123.6%
(4.7) pts.
(5.1) pts.
(107.6) pts.
6.1%
Income/(loss) from continuing operations
$ (1,053)
$ 181
$ 174
$ 5,475
$  4,777
Income/(loss) margin from continuing operations
(4.7)%
0.8 pts.
0.8 pts.
24.3 pts.
21.2%
Diluted earnings/(loss) per share from  
continuing operations
$   (1.14)
$0.19
$0.19
$   5.90
$    5.14
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to 
the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
**	Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit costs.


===== PAGE 49 =====
48
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW
This section provides a summary of the company’s financial performance in 2017 as compared to 2016. For additional information, 
see the company’s 2017 Annual Report.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$  79,139
$  79,919
(1.0)%*
Gross profit margin
46.7%**
48.2%**
(1.5) pts.
Total expense and other (income)
$  25,543**
$  26,186**
(2.5)%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio
32.3%**
32.8%**
(0.5 ) pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
$  11,400
$  12,330
(7.5)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations
$    5,642+
$       449
NM
Income from continuing operations
$    5,758+
$  11,881
(51.5)%
Income from continuing operations margin
7.3%
14.9%
(7.6) pts.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$          (5)
$          (9)
(44.7)%
Net income
$    5,753+
$  11,872
(51.5)%
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution
$      6.14+
$    12.39
(50.4)%
Consolidated earnings per share—assuming dilution
$      6.14+
$    12.38
(50.4)%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
937.4
958.7
(2.2)%
Assets++
$125,356
$117,470
6.7%
Liabilities++
$107,631
$  99,078
8.6%
Equity++
$  17,725
$  18,392
(3.6)%
*	 (1.3) percent adjusted for currency. 
**	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
+	  Includes a charge of $5.5 billion associated with U.S. tax reform, or $5.84 of diluted earnings per share in 2017.
++At December 31
NM—Not meaningful
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for 2017 and 2016. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$  5,753+
$11,872
(51.5)%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
(5)
(9)
(44.7)
Income from continuing operations
$  5,758+
$11,881
(51.5)%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
718
735
(2.3)
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income)
856**
265**
223.3
U.S. tax reform charge
5,475
—
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$12,807**
$12,880**
(0.6)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share
$  13.66**
$  13.44**
1.6%
*	 See page 58 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) earnings.
**	Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
+	 Includes a charge of $5.5 billion associated with U.S. tax reform.
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 50 =====
49
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Snapshot
In 2017, the company reported $79.1 billion in revenue and $5.8 
billion in income from continuing operations, which included a 
charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax 
reform. Operating (non-GAAP) earnings were $12.8 billion, which 
excluded the tax reform charge. Diluted earnings per share from 
continuing operations were $6.14 as reported and $13.66 on 
an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The company generated $16.7 
billion in cash from operations, $13.0 billion in free cash flow and 
delivered shareholder returns of $9.8 billion in gross common 
stock repurchases and dividends.
Total consolidated revenue in 2017 decreased 1.0 percent as 
reported and 1 percent year to year adjusted for currency. The 
company returned to revenue growth in the fourth quarter with 
an increase of 3.6 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for 
currency. Year-to-year revenue performance improved sequentially 
in the second half of 2017 compared to first-half performance. 
Contributors to the second-half improvement included: 
momentum in cloud and as-a-Service offerings, strong Systems 
growth across IBM Z, Power Systems and Storage Systems, 
improved software transactional performance and improved 
growth in Consulting. 
Cognitive Solutions increased 1.5 percent as reported and 
1 percent adjusted for currency with growth in Solutions Software 
and Transaction Processing Software as reported and adjusted 
for currency. Solutions Software performance included growth 
in annuity revenue, led by as-a-Service solutions. Global Business 
Services decreased 2.1 percent as reported and 2 percent 
adjusted for currency with declines across all lines of business. 
GBS strategic imperatives revenue increased 10 percent as 
reported and adjusted for currency year to year as the business 
shifted resources and moved into the high-value strategic 
areas of digital, cloud and analytics. Technology Services 
& Cloud Platforms decreased 3.0 percent as reported and 
3 percent adjusted for currency, primarily driven by a decline in 
Infrastructure Services. Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 
strategic imperatives revenue was up 19 percent as reported and 
18 percent adjusted for currency year to year, driven by hybrid 
cloud services, security and mobile. Systems increased 6.2 
percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted for currency driven 
by strong contribution from the z14 mainframe in the second half 
of 2017 and growth in Storage Systems.
The company continued to deliver solid growth in its strategic 
imperatives which generated $36.5 billion of revenue and grew 
11 percent as reported and adjusted for currency. Total Cloud 
revenue of $17.0 billion increased 24 percent as reported and 
adjusted for currency, with as-a-Service revenue up 31 percent 
as reported and adjusted for currency. The annual exit run rate 
for as-a-Service revenue increased to $10.3 billion in 2017 
compared to $8.6 billion in 2016. Analytics revenue of $20.6 
billion increased 6 percent as reported and adjusted for currency. 
Mobile increased 19 percent as reported and adjusted for 
currency and Security increased 55 percent (54 percent adjusted 
for currency). 
The consolidated gross margin of 46.7 percent decreased 1.5 
points year to year and reflected investments and mix, partially 
offset by benefits from productivity. The operating (non-GAAP) 
gross margin of 47.2 percent decreased 1.6 points versus the 
prior year primarily driven by the same factors.
Total expense and other (income) decreased 2.5 percent in 
2017 compared to the prior year. The year-to-year decrease 
was primarily the result of continued focus on efficiency in 
spending and reduced expenses for workforce transformation. 
This included a lower level of workforce rebalancing charges 
(3 points), lower operational spending (3 points) and a 2016 
charge for real estate actions (1 point). The year-to-year decrease 
in total expense and other (income) was partially offset by 
higher retirement-related costs (3 points), spending related to 
acquisitions completed in the prior 12 months (1 point) and a 
decline in IP income (1 point). Total operating (non-GAAP) 
expense and other (income) decreased 6.2 percent year to year, 
driven primarily by the same factors, excluding the impact of 
higher non-operational retirement related costs. 
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $11.4 billion 
decreased 7.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was 14.4 percent, 
a decrease of 1.0 points versus 2016. The continuing operations 
effective tax rate for 2017 was 49.5 percent, which included a 
charge of $5.5 billion from the enactment of U.S. tax reform in 
December 2017, compared to 3.6 percent in 2016. The charge 
encompassed several elements, including taxes on accumulated 
overseas profits and the revaluation of certain deferred tax 
assets and liabilities. The low tax rate in 2016 was primarily the 
result of a refund ($1.0 billion) of previously paid Japan taxes 
plus interest. Income from continuing operations of $5.8 billion 
decreased 51.5 percent, impacted by the tax reform charge, and 
the net income margin was 7.3 percent, a decrease of 7.6 points 
versus 2016. Net income of $5.8 billion decreased 51.5 percent 


===== PAGE 51 =====
50
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from 
continuing operations of $13.7 billion decreased 0.3 percent 
year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from 
continuing operations was 17.4 percent. Operating (non-GAAP) 
income from continuing operations of $12.8 billion decreased 
0.6 percent with an operating (non-GAAP) income margin from 
continuing operations of 16.2 percent, essentially flat year to 
year. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing 
operations in 2017 was 6.8 percent, which included the effect 
of discrete tax benefits in the first and second quarters of 2017. 
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $6.14 
in 2017, which included the one-time charge associated with 
U.S. tax reform, decreased 50.4 percent year to year. Operating 
(non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $13.66 increased 1.6 
percent versus 2016. In 2017, the company repurchased 27.2 
million shares of its common stock at a cost of $4.3 billion.
At December 31, 2017, the balance sheet remained strong and 
well positioned to support the business over the long term. Cash, 
restricted cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2017 
were $12.8 billion, an increase of $4.1 billion from December 31, 
2016. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows were:
Total assets increased $7.9 billion ($3.0 billion adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2016 driven by:
•	 Increases in cash, restricted cash and marketable securities 
($4.1 billion), total receivables ($2.9 billion), retirement plan 
assets ($1.6 billion) and goodwill ($0.6 billion); partially 
offset by
•	 Decreases in intangible assets ($0.9 billion). 
Total liabilities increased $8.6 billion ($4.0 billion adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2016 driven by:
•	 Increases in total debt ($4.7 billion) and taxes ($3.5 billion).
Total equity of $17.7 billion decreased $0.7 billion from 
December 31, 2016 as a result of:
•	 Decreases from dividends ($5.5 billion) and share 
repurchases ($4.3 billion); partially offset by 
•	 Increases from net income ($5.8 billion), retirement-related 
benefit plans ($2.3 billion) and equity translation 
adjustments ($0.8 billion). 
The company generated $16.7 billion in cash flow provided by 
operating activities, a decrease of $0.4 billion compared to 2016, 
driven primarily by performance-related declines within net 
income and an increase in cash tax payments, partially offset by an 
increase in cash provided by receivables. Net cash used in investing 
activities of $7.1 billion was $3.8 billion lower than the prior year, 
primarily driven by a decrease in cash used for acquisitions 
($5.2 billion). Net cash used in financing activities of $6.4 billion 
increased $0.5 billion compared to 2016, driven primarily by 
increased gross common share repurchases ($0.8 billion). 


===== PAGE 52 =====
51
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2017 versus 2016 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s 
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to 
reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions
$18,453
$18,187 
1.5%
1.0%
Gross margin
78.6%*
81.8%*
(3.2) pts.
Global Business Services
16,348
16,700
(2.1)%
(1.8)%
Gross margin
24.9%*
26.7%*
(1.8) pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
34,277
35,337
(3.0)%
(3.4)%
Gross margin
40.3%*
41.8%*
(1.5) pts.
Systems
8,194
7,714
6.2%
5.4%
Gross margin
53.2%*
55.7%*
(2.5) pts.
Global Financing
1,696
1,692
0.3%
(0.7)%
Gross margin
29.3%
38.7%
(9.4) pts.
Other
171
289
(40.7)%
(41.1)%
Gross margin
(173.9)%*
(184.7)%*
10.8 pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$79,139
$79,919 
(1.0)%
(1.3)%
Total consolidated gross profit
$36,943*
$38,516*
(4.1)%
Total consolidated gross margin
46.7%*
48.2%*
(1.5) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
449
494
(9.2)%
Retirement-related costs/(income)
—*
—*
—%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$37,392*
$39,010*
(4.1)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
47.2%*
48.8%*
(1.6) pts.
* Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
Cognitive Solutions
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Cognitive Solutions external revenue
$18,453
$18,187 
1.5%
1.0%
Solutions Software
$12,806
$12,589 
1.7%
1.3%
Transaction Processing Software
5,647
5,598
0.9
0.3
The growth in Solutions Software revenue was led by key areas 
including security, industry platforms and Watson offerings, 
as the company continued to embed cognitive into its security 
offerings and drive vertical solutions. The company continued to 
expand the market for Watson Health which had strong double-
digit revenue growth as reported and adjusted for currency 
compared to the prior year. There was year-to-year growth in 
annuity revenue as reported and at constant currency with strong 
double-digit growth in SaaS revenue as reported and adjusted 
for currency. Transaction Processing Software revenue grew as 
reported, but was essentially flat adjusted for currency compared 
to the prior year. 
Cognitive Solutions total strategic imperatives revenue of $12.0 
billion grew 2 percent year to year as reported and adjusted 
for currency. Cloud revenue of $2.5 billion grew 19 percent as 
reported and adjusted for currency, with an as-a-Service exit run 
rate of $2.1 billion. 


===== PAGE 53 =====
52
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017*
2016*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Cognitive Solutions
External gross profit
$14,503
$14,883
(2.6)%
External gross profit 
margin
78.6%
81.8%
(3.2)pts.
Pre-tax income
$  6,795
$  6,325
7.4%
Pre-tax margin
32.2%
30.4%
1.8 pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 	
benefit cost. 
Gross margin in Cognitive Solutions was impacted by continued 
investment and an increased mix toward SaaS. There was also a 
higher level of royalty cost associated with IP licensing 
agreements compared to the prior year.
Global Business Services
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Global Business Services external revenue
$16,348 
$16,700 
(2.1)%
(1.8)%
Consulting
$  7,262 
$  7,332 
(1.0)%
(0.4)%
Global Process Services
1,265
1,388
(8.8)
(9.0)
Application Management
7,821
7,980
(2.0)
(1.9)
Global Business Services revenue decreased in 2017 compared 
to the prior year, with declines across Consulting, GPS and 
Application Management. The company continued to transform 
this business and shift its practices to digital, cognitive and 
cloud. Total strategic imperatives revenue of $9.8 billion grew 
10 percent as reported and adjusted for currency year to year. 
Cloud revenue of $4.0 billion grew 34 percent as reported 
(35 percent adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run 
rate of $1.3 billion. However, this growth was more than offset by 
declines in the more traditional areas that the company has been 
shifting away from such as large ERP and on-premise enterprise 
application implementation.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017*
2016*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$4,077
$4,457
(8.5)%
External gross profit 
margin
24.9%
26.7%
(1.8) pts.
Pre-tax income
$1,362
$1,683
(19.0)%
Pre-tax margin
8.2%
9.8%
(1.7) pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 	
benefit cost.
Profit performance for 2017 was impacted by investments to 
drive transformation and reflected pricing and profit pressure in 
the more traditional IT services. The company’s continued focus 
is on improving productivity with a streamlined practice model 
and new project management approaches.


===== PAGE 54 =====
53
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The TS&CP gross profit margin decline in 2017 was driven 
primarily by large contract conclusions, delays in productivity 
improvements, mix from Integration Software and investments 
in cloud, which were partially offset by savings from prior-year 
workforce rebalancing. Pre-tax income performance included 
a lower level of charges related to workforce and real estate 
actions in 2017 compared to 2016.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms external revenue
$34,277 
$35,337 
(3.0)%
(3.4)%
Infrastructure Services
$22,690
$23,543
(3.6)%
(4.1)%
Technical Support Services
7,196
7,272
(1.0)
(1.5)
Integration Software 
4,390
4,521
(2.9)
(3.4)
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue decreased in 
2017 compared to the prior year, with declines across all lines 
of business. The revenue decline in Infrastructure Services 
reflected the impact of contract conclusions at the end of 2016 
and the shift away from lower-value work within the business. 
While Technical Support Services also declined year to year, the 
company focused on growing its multi-vendor support services 
providing clients a single source of expertise across different 
vendor solutions. Within Integration Software, although the 
annuity base remained relatively stable year to year in 2017, 
transactional revenue declined as the portfolio shifted to the 
IBM Cloud. Strategic imperatives revenue of $10.4 billion grew 
19 percent year to year as reported (18 percent adjusted for 
currency). Cloud revenue of $7.1 billion grew 21 percent as 
reported (20 percent adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service 
exit run rate of $6.9 billion.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017*
2016*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Technology Services &  
Cloud Platforms
External Technology 
Services gross profit
$10,215
$10,927
(6.5)%
External Technology 
Services gross profit 
margin
34.2%
35.5%
(1.3) pts.
External Integration 
Software gross profit
$  3,587
$  3,830
(6.4)%
External Integration 
Software gross profit 
margin
81.7%
84.7%
(3.0) pts.
External total gross profit
$13,802
$14,757
(6.5)%
External total gross profit 
margin
40.3%
41.8%
(1.5) pts.
Pre-tax income
$  4,286
$  4,643
(7.7)%
Pre-tax margin
12.3%
12.9%
(0.6) pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.


===== PAGE 55 =====
54
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Systems external revenue
$8,194 
$7,714 
6.2%
5.4%
Systems Hardware
$6,494 
$5,926 
9.6%
8.6%
IBM Z
24.0
22.3
Power Systems
(3.7)
(4.3)
Storage Systems
7.7
7.0
Operating Systems Software
1,701
1,788
(4.9)
(5.3)
The year-to-year growth in Systems revenue was driven by a 
combination of strong z14 market acceptance following its 
successful launch in the third quarter of 2017 and growth 
in Storage Systems. In 2017, all-flash array offerings were a 
catalyst for Storage Systems growth, with strong double-digit 
growth throughout the year. Power Systems revenue decreased 
with declines in the mid-range and low-range products, partially 
offset by growth in the high-end. This performance reflected the 
company’s shift to a growing Linux market while continuing to 
serve a high-value, but declining UNIX market. Total strategic 
imperatives revenue of $4.3 billion grew 28 percent year to year 
as reported (26 percent adjusted for currency). Cloud revenue 
of $3.4 billion grew 26 percent as reported (25 percent adjusted 
for currency).
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017*
2016*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Systems
External Systems Hardware 
gross profit
$2,893
$2,719
6.4%
External Systems Hardware 
gross profit margin
44.6%
45.9%
(1.3)pts.
External Operating Systems 
Software gross profit
$1,469
$1,577
(6.9)%
External Operating Systems 
Software gross profit 
margin
86.4%
88.2%
(1.8)pts.
External total gross profit
$4,362
$4,296
1.5%
External total gross  
profit margin
53.2%
55.7%
(2.5)pts.
Pre-tax income
$1,128
$   925
21.9%
Pre-tax margin
12.6%
10.9%
1.7pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
The Systems gross profit margin decrease was driven by margin 
declines across all product lines, partially offset by product mix 
primarily toward higher margin IBM Z, reflecting product cycle 
dynamics. Pre-tax income growth was driven by the strong 
performance in Systems Hardware. Overall 2017 performance 
reflected a successful repositioning of the business through 
continuous reinvention of core platforms and expansion into 
new workloads.
Global Financing
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Results of Operations
External revenue
$1,696 
$1,692 
0.3%
Internal revenue
1,471
1,802
(18.4)
Total revenue
$3,168
$3,494
(9.3)%
Pre-tax income
$1,278*
$1,654*
(22.8)%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
The decline in Global Financing total revenue was driven by a 
decline in internal revenue with external revenue essentially flat 
compared to the prior year. External revenue grew 0.3 percent 
due to an increase in external used equipment sales (up 14.9 
percent), partially offset by a decline in external financing (down 
5.2 percent). The decline in internal revenue of 18.4 percent was 
driven by a decrease in internal used equipment sales (down 25.2 
percent), partially offset by an increase in internal financing (up 
13.9 percent). The decrease in Global Financing pre-tax income 
was primarily driven by a decrease in gross profit, partially offset 
by a decline in financing receivables provisions. 


===== PAGE 56 =====
55
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017*
2016*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total revenue
$79,139 
$79,919 
(1.0)%
(1.3)%
Americas
$37,641 
$37,697 
(0.1)%
(0.6)%
Europe/Middle East/Africa
24,397
24,805
(1.6)
(2.7)
Asia Pacific
17,102
17,417
(1.8)
(0.9)
*	 Recast to conform to 2018 presentation.
Americas revenue was essentially flat year to year as reported, 
but decreased 1 percent adjusted for currency with a decline in 
North America partially offset by growth in Latin America, both 
as reported and adjusted for currency. Within North America, the 
U.S. decreased 1.4 percent and Canada increased 4.9 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency). In Latin America, Brazil 
increased 7.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) and 
Mexico increased 9.2 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency).
EMEA revenue decreased 1.6 percent as reported and 3 percent 
adjusted for currency. The UK decreased 11.2 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency) and Germany decreased 3.2 percent 
(6 percent adjusted for currency). France increased 6.7 percent 
(4 percent adjusted for currency), and Spain was up 8.3 percent 
(6 percent adjusted for currency). 
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 1.8 percent as reported and 
1 percent adjusted for currency. Japan decreased 1.2 percent 
as reported, but increased 2 percent adjusted for currency. 
India grew 8.6 percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted 
for currency. China decreased 9.7 percent (9 percent adjusted 
for currency) and Australia decreased 5.8 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency).
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense 
and other (income)
$25,543*
$26,186*
(2.5)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(496)
(503)
(1.4)
Acquisition-related charges
(52)
(5)
NM
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
(1,341)*
(448)*
199.5
Operating (non-GAAP) 
expense and  
other (income)
$23,654*
$25,230*
(6.2)%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
32.3%*
32.8%*
(0.5 )pts.
Operating (non-GAAP) 
expense-to-revenue ratio
29.9%*
31.6%*
(1.7 )pts.
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 57 =====
56
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and  
administrative  expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$17,100 *
$17,513 *
(2.4)%
Advertising and promotional 
expense
1,445
1,327
8.9
Workforce rebalancing 
charges
199
1,038
(80.9)
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
496
503
(1.4)
Stock-based compensation
384
401
(4.1)
Bad debt expense
55
87
(36.5)
Total consolidated  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$19,680*
$20,869*
(5.7)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(496)
(503)
(1.4)
Acquisition-related 
charges
(13)
2
NM
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
—*
—*
—
Operating (non-GAAP) 
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$19,170*
$20,368*
(5.9)%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
NM—Not meaningful
Total SG&A expense decreased 5.7 percent in 2017 versus 2016, 
driven primarily by the following factors: 
•	 Lower workforce rebalancing charges (4 points); and
•	 Lower spending (3 points); partially offset by
•	 Spending related to acquisitions in the prior 12 months 
(1 point). 
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 5.9 percent 
year to year driven primarily by the same factors.
Bad debt expense decreased $32 million in 2017 compared 
to 2016. The receivables provision coverage was 1.6 percent 
at December 31, 2017, a decrease of 40 basis points from 
December 31, 2016. 
Research, Development and Engineering Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017*
2016*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated  
research, development 
and engineering
$5,590
$5,726
(2.4)%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
—
—
—
Operating (non-GAAP) 
research, development 
and engineering
$5,590 
$5,726 
(2.4)%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost. 
RD&E expense was 7.1 percent of revenue in 2017 and 7.2 percent 
of revenue in 2016. 
RD&E expense decreased 2.4 percent in 2017 versus 2016 
primarily driven by: 
•	 Lower spending (4 points); partially offset by 
•	 The impact of acquisitions completed in the prior 12-month 
period (1 point); and 
•	 The effects of currency. 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Licensing of intellectual 
property including 
royalty-based fees
$1,193
$1,390
(14.1)%
Custom development income
252
214
17.5
Sales/other transfers of 
intellectual property
21
27
(24.2)
Total
$1,466 
$1,631 
(10.2)%
Licensing of intellectual property including royalty-based fees 
decreased 14.1 percent in 2017 compared to 2016. The company 
entered into new partnership agreements in 2017, which included 
three transactions with period income greater than $100 million, 
compared to four transactions greater than $100 million in 2016.


===== PAGE 58 =====
57
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction  
losses/(gains)
$   405
$(116)
NM
(Gains)/losses on  
derivative instruments
(341)
260
NM
Interest income
(144)
(108)
33.5%
Net (gains)/losses from 
securities and  
investment assets
(20)
23
NM 
Retirement-related         
costs/(income)
1,341*
448*
199.5%
Other
(116)
85
NM
Total consolidated other 
(income) and expense
$ 1,125*
$ 593*
89.8%
Non-operating adjustments
Acquisition-related 
charges
(39)
(7)
444.6
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income
(1,341)*
(448)*
199.5
Operating (non-GAAP) other 
(income) and expense
$   (255)
$ 138
NM
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 
benefit cost.
NM—Not meaningful
Total consolidated other (income) and expense was expense of 
$1,125 million in 2017 compared to $593 million in 2016. The 
increase in expense of $532 million year over year was primarily 
driven by:
•	 Higher retirement-related costs ($893 million); and 
•	 Lower gains on divestitures ($61 million); partially offset by 
•	 Real estate capacity charges (reflected in Other in the  
table above) in 2016 related to workforce transformation 
($328 million); and 
•	 Lower net exchange losses ($81 million).
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2017
2016
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense 
Total
$615
$630
(2.3)%
Interest expense decreased $15 million compared to 2016. 
Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the related external 
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business. 
Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized interest) in 2017 
was $1,273 million, an increase of $67 million year to year, 
primarily driven by higher average interest rates.
Income Taxes
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2017 was 
49.5 percent, an increase of 45.8 points versus the prior year. The 
fourth-quarter 2017 charge of $5.5 billion related to the impact 
of the enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act resulted in an 
increase to the effective tax rate of 48.0 points. Without this impact, 
the continuing operations tax rate would have been 1.5 percent 
compared to a 2016 rate of 3.6 percent, with the remaining change 
in the rate year to year driven by the following factors:
•	 An increased benefit year to year in the utilization of  
foreign tax credits of 5.4 points; 
•	 A benefit related to an intra-entity asset transfer in the  
first quarter of 2017 of 5.1 points; 
•	 A benefit due to the tax write down of an investment in the 
fourth quarter of 2017 of 1.7 points; and
•	 A benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax earnings in 
2017 of 1.0 points; partially offset by
•	 The favorable resolution of the longstanding tax matter in 
Japan in 2016 of 9.5 points; and
•	 An increase year to year in tax charges related to 
intercompany payments of 1.5 points.
The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax 
rate was 6.8 percent, an increase of 0.2 points versus 2016, 
principally driven by the same factors described above. In 
2017, the geographic and product mix of pre-tax earnings were 
more favorable than the company expected and there was 
increased utilization of foreign tax credits. These impacts drove 
the underlying continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) 
effective tax rate to approximately 12 percent before discrete 
period benefits.
Financial Position
Cash, restricted cash and marketable securities at December 31, 
2017 were $12,842 million. During 2017, the company continued 
to manage the investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation 
and liquidity objectives. 
Total debt of $46,824 million increased $4,655 million from prior 
year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at December 31, 
2017 was $1,496 million, an increase of $597 million from the 
prior year end. Within total debt, $31,434 million was in support 
of the Global Financing business which was leveraged at a 9.0 
to 1 ratio. During 2017, the company completed bond issuances 
totaling $7,986 million, with terms ranging from 2 to 12 years, 
and interest rates ranging from 0.95 to 3.30 percent depending 
on maturity. This included IBM Credit’s first public debt issuance 
of $3,000 million in September 2017. The company generated 
strong cash flow from operations and continued to have access 
to additional sources of liquidity through the capital markets and 
its Credit Facilities. 
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured 
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at 
December 31. At December 31, 2017, the overall net under-
funded position was $12,890 million, a decrease of $1,949 
million from December 31, 2016 driven by asset returns, partially 


===== PAGE 59 =====
58
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
offset by interest cost and a decrease in discount rates. The 
company’s qualified defined benefit plans were well funded and 
the cash requirements related to these plans remain stable going 
forward at approximately $400 million per year through 2020. In 
2017, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets was 9.6 
percent and the plan was 104 percent funded at December 31. 
Overall, global asset returns were 8.3 percent and the qualified 
defined benefit plans worldwide were 100 percent funded at 
December 31, 2017. 
During 2017, the company generated $16,724 million in cash 
from operations, a decrease of $360 million compared to 2016. In 
addition, the company generated $12,992 million in free cash flow, 
an increase of $1,293 million versus the prior year. The company 
returned $9,847 million to shareholders in 2017, with $5,506 
million in dividends and $4,340 million in gross share repurchases. 
In 2017, the company repurchased 27.2 million shares.
GAAP Reconciliation
The following tables provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating 
earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, 
may differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on 
pages 18 and 19 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2017:
GAAP
Acquisition- 
Related 
**      Adjustments
Retirement- 
Related 
Adjustments**
Tax Reform 
Charge
Operating 
(non-GAAP)**
Gross profit
$36,943
$ 449
$       —
$       —
$37,392
Gross profit margin
46.7%
0.6 pts.
— pts.
— pts.
47.2%
SG&A
$19,680
$(509)
$        —
$       —
$19,170
RD&E
5,590
—
—
—
5,590
Other (income) and expense
1,125
(39)
(1,341)
—
(255)
Total expense and other (income)
25,543
(548)
(1,341)
—
23,654
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
11,400
997
1,341
—
13,738
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
14.4%
1.3  pts.
1.7 pts.
— pts.
17.4%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,642
$ 279
$     485
$(5,475)
$     931
Effective tax rate
49.5%
(1.6) pts.
(1.3) pts.
(39.9) pts.
6.8%
Income from continuing operations
$  5,758
$ 718
$     856
$ 5,475
$12,807
Income margin from continuing operations
7.3%
0.9 pts.
1.1 pts.
6.9 pts.
16.2%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$    6.14
$0.77
$   0.91
$   5.84
$  13.66
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income 
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results. 
**Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2016:
GAAP
Acquisition- 
Related 
**      Adjustments
Retirement- 
Related 
Adjustments
Operating 
**         (non-GAAP)**
Gross profit
$38,516 
$   494 
$      —
$39,010 
Gross profit margin
48.2%
0.6 pts.
— pts.
48.8%
SG&A
$20,869 
$  (501)
$     —
$20,368 
RD&E
5,726
—
—
5,726
Other (income) and expense
593
(7)
(448)
138
Total expense and other (income)
26,186
(508)
(448)
25,230
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
12,330
1,003
448
13,780
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations
15.4%
1.3 pts.
0.6 pts.
17.2%
Provision for income taxes*
$     449
$   268 
$  183
$     900 
Effective tax rate
3.6%
1.7 pts.
1.2 pts.
6.5%
Income from continuing operations 
$11,881
$   735
$  265
$12,880
Income margin from continuing operations
14.9%
0.9 pts.
0.3 pts.
16.1%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$  12.39
$  0.77 
$ 0.28
$  13.44 
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income 
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
**Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.


===== PAGE 60 =====
59
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
The company’s strategies, investments and actions are all made 
with an objective of optimizing long-term performance. A long-
term perspective ensures that the company is well-positioned to 
take advantage of the major shifts in technology, business and 
the global economy.
As part of its long-term strategic model, the company expects 
to continue to allocate capital efficiently and effectively to 
investments, and to return value to shareholders through a 
combination of dividends and share repurchases. Over the long 
term, in consideration of the opportunities it will continue to 
develop, the company continues to expect to have the ability to 
generate low single-digit revenue growth, and with a higher-value 
business mix, mid single-digit profit growth, high single-digit 
operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share growth, with free cash 
flow realization of GAAP net income over 90 percent.
Over the last several years, the company has been making 
investments and shifting resources, embedding AI and cloud 
into its offerings while building new solutions and modernizing 
its existing platforms. These investments not only drive current 
performance, but will extend the company’s innovation leadership 
into the future. The company’s key differentiators are built around 
three pillars—innovative technology, industry expertise and trust 
and security, uniquely delivered through an integrated model.
IBM’s proposed acquisition of Red Hat will bring together the 
best-in-class hybrid cloud providers and will enable companies 
to securely unlock the full value of cloud for their businesses. 
IBM and Red Hat will be strongly positioned to address this 
opportunity and accelerate hybrid cloud adoption. The company 
is proceeding through the regulatory process and expects to 
close the transaction in the second half of 2019. The acquisition 
of Red Hat reinforces IBM’s high-value model. It is expected to 
accelerate IBM’s revenue growth, gross margin and be accretive 
to free cash flow within 12 months of closing. The company will 
continue with a disciplined financial policy and is committed 
to maintaining strong investment-grade credit ratings and 
supporting a solid and growing dividend. The company will target 
a leverage profile consistent with a mid to high single A credit 
rating. In order to reduce debt, the company intends to suspend 
its share repurchase program in 2020 and 2021.
At mid-January 2019 spot rates, the company expects a 4 point 
currency headwind to first quarter 2019 revenue growth, which 
is approximately two points worse than the year-to-year impact 
realized in the fourth quarter of 2018. The company expects 1 to 
2 point sequential improvement in revenue growth at constant 
currency from the fourth quarter 2018 to the first quarter 2019. 
For full-year 2019, the company expects to expand gross and 
pre-tax margins.
Overall, the company expects GAAP earnings per share from 
continuing operations for 2019 to be at least $12.45. Excluding 
acquisition-related charges of $0.91 per share, non-operating 
retirement-related items of $0.45 per share and tax reform 
enactment impacts of $0.09 per share, operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share is expected to be at least $13.90. For the first 
quarter of 2019, the company expects GAAP earnings per share 
from continuing operations and operating (non-GAAP) earnings 
per share to be approximately 16 percent of the respective full-
year expectations. In January 2019, the company announced 
the intent to divest certain software products and its mortgage-
servicing business during the year. The estimates of the impacts 
from these divestitures are not dependent on timing of closing 
and have been included in the full-year earnings per share 
expectations. However, earnings per share expectations do not 
include Red Hat, as financial implications for 2019 are heavily 
dependent on the timing of the closing. Expectations will be 
updated after the transaction closes. 
The company expects free cash flow to be approximately $12 
billion in 2019. Free cash flow expectations for the year reflect 
expected operational profit performance and continued working 
capital efficiency, partially offset by a cash tax headwind. Free 
cash flow realization, which is defined as free cash flow to 
income from continuing operations (GAAP), is expected to be 
approximately 100 percent for the year. These expectations 
also take into account the estimated impact of the announced 
divestitures of the select IBM software products and mortgage 
servicing business and an estimate of pre-closing financing costs 
associated with the Red Hat acquisition. 
For full-year 2019, the company expects the GAAP effective tax 
rate to be approximately 14 percent, excluding discrete items. The 
company expects its operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2019 to be 
approximately 11 to 12 percent (which is a 3 to 4 points headwind 
year to year), including an estimate of potential discrete items. 
The rates will change year to year based on discrete tax events, 
such as the settlement of income tax audits and changes in tax 
laws, as well as recurring factors including the geographic mix 
of income before taxes, state and local taxes and the effects of 
various global income tax strategies. The GAAP effective tax rate 
could also be affected by adjustments to the previously recorded 
charges for U.S. tax reform attributable to any changes in law, 
new regulations and guidance, audit adjustments, among others.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2019 and continuing 
throughout the year, IBM’s Global Financing business will begin 
winding down the portion of its commercial financing operations 
which provides short-term working capital solutions for OEM 
information technology suppliers, distributors and resellers. 
IBM Global Financing will continue to provide differentiated 
end-to-end financing solutions, including commercial financing 
in support of IBM partner relationships. The wind down of this 
activity is expected to reduce IBM’s revenue, with a nominal 
impact to profit, however, it does not change the company’s 
earnings per share and free cash flow expectations for 2019.
Beginning in 2019, within the IBM U.S. Qualified Personal 
Pension Plan, substantially all the plan participants are now 
considered inactive, which, as required by U.S. GAAP, results in 
a change in the amortization period of unrecognized actuarial 
losses, from the average remaining service period of active plan 
participants to the average remaining life expectancy of inactive 
plan participants. These periods are approximately 6 years and 


===== PAGE 61 =====
60
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
18 years, respectively. As a result of this change, there will be 
a reduction to 2019 amortization expense of approximately 
$900 million. Actuarial loss amortization is reported within 
non-operating pension costs. There will be no impact to 2019 
operating (non-GAAP) retirement-related costs, funded status, 
retiree benefit payments or funding requirements of the U.S. 
Qualified Personal Pension Plan. However, there will be an impact 
to free cash flow realization in 2019. 
The company expects 2019 pre-tax retirement-related plan cost 
to be approximately $2.0 billion, a decrease of approximately 
$1 billion compared to 2018. This estimate reflects current 
pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2018. Within total 
retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan 
cost is expected to be approximately $1.5 billion, approximately 
flat versus 2018. Non-operating retirement-related plan cost 
is expected to be approximately $0.6 billion, a decrease of 
approximately $1 billion compared to 2018, primarily driven 
by lower actuarial loss amortization resulting from the change 
in amortization period for the U.S. plan. Contributions for all 
retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately 
$2.4 billion in 2019, an increase of approximately $100 million 
compared to 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow 
from operations, providing a source of funds ranging between 
$15.2 billion and $17.1 billion per year over the past three years. 
The company provides for additional liquidity through several 
sources: maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to 
global funding sources, committed global credit facilities and 
other committed and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. 
The following table provides a summary of the major sources of 
liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2016 through 2018.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
($ in billions)
2018
2017
2016
Net cash from  
operating activities
$15.2 
$16.7 
$17.1 
Cash, restricted cash and 
short-term marketable 
securities
$12.2 
$12.8 *
$  8.8 *
Committed global  
credit facilities
$15.3 
$15.3 
$10.3 
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash.
On October 28, 2018, IBM announced its intent to acquire all 
the outstanding shares of Red Hat. The transaction is subject to 
customary closing conditions, including regulatory clearance. The 
company intends to fund this transaction through a combination 
of cash and debt. In connection with this acquisition, IBM entered 
into a commitment letter under which certain banks committed 
to provide the company with a 364-day unsecured bridge term 
loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $20 billion 
to fund the acquisition.
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt 
securities at December 31, 2018 appear in the table below. As a 
result of the proposed Red Hat transaction, in the fourth quarter 
of 2018, Standard and Poor’s lowered IBM and IBM Credit’s long-
term debt rating to A from A+, with no change to the short-term 
debt rating of A-1, and Fitch Ratings has lowered IBM and IBM 
Credit’s long-term debt rating to A from A+, with no change to 
the short-term debt rating of F1. Moody’s placed IBM and IBM 
Credit’s long-term debt rating of A1 under review for downgrade, 
with no change to the short-term debt rating of Prime-1. IBM will 
continue with a disciplined financial policy and is committed to 
maintaining strong investment-grade credit ratings. 
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its 
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which 
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, 
limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale 
and leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s 
consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s 
ability to merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met. 
The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s 
consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less 
than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect 
to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million. 
The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt 
covenants and provides periodic certification to its lenders. The 
failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an 
event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions 
apply. If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and 
interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would 
become immediately due and payable. 
The company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in 
its debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the 
holders to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate 
payments thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. 
The company’s contractual agreements governing derivative 
instruments contain standard market clauses which can trigger 
the termination of the agreement if the company’s credit rating 
were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2018, the 
fair value of those instruments that were in a liability position was 
$383 million, before any applicable netting, and this position is 
subject to fluctuations in fair value period to period based on 
the level of the company’s outstanding instruments and market 
conditions. The company has no other contractual arrangements 
that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would result in a 
material adverse effect on its financial position or liquidity.
IBM and IBM Credit Ratings
Standard 
and Poor’s
Moody’s 
Investors 
Service
Fitch 
Ratings
Senior long-term debt
A
A1
A
Commercial paper
A-1
Prime-1
F1
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash 
flow presentation on page 73 and highlights causes and events 
underlying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 40. 
For the purpose of running its business, the company manages, 
monitors and analyzes cash flows in a different format.


===== PAGE 62 =====
61
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management uses free cash flow as a measure to evaluate 
its operating results, plan share repurchase levels, strategic 
investments and assess its ability and need to incur and service 
debt. The entire free cash flow amount is not necessarily available 
for discretionary expenditures. The company defines free cash 
flow as net cash from operating activities less the change in 
Global Financing receivables and net capital expenditures, 
including the investment in software. A key objective of the 
Global Financing business is to generate strong returns on equity, 
and increasing receivables is the basis for growth. Accordingly, 
management considers Global Financing receivables as a 
profit-generating investment, not as working capital that should 
be minimized for efficiency. Therefore, management includes 
presentations of both free cash flow and net cash from operating 
activities that exclude the effect of Global Financing receivables. 
Free cash flow guidance is derived using an estimate of profit, 
working capital and operational cash outflows. As previously 
noted, the company views Global Financing receivables as a 
profit-generating investment which it seeks to maximize and 
therefore it is not considered when formulating guidance for free 
cash flow. As a result, the company does not estimate a GAAP 
Net Cash from Operations expectation metric.
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in 
2018, after investing $3.7 billion in capital investments primarily 
in support of the services and cloud-based businesses, the 
company generated free cash flow of $11.9 billion, a decrease of 
$1.1 billion compared to 2017. The decrease was primarily driven 
by higher capital expenditures, declines in sales cycle working 
capital and an increase in cash income tax payments.
In 2018, the company continued to focus its cash utilization 
on returning value to shareholders including $5.7 billion in 
dividends and $4.4 billion in gross common stock repurchases 
(32.9 million shares).
Over the past three years, the company generated over $36 billion 
in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested over 
$6 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $28 billion 
to shareholders through dividends and gross share repurchases. 
The company’s performance during this period demonstrates 
that there is fungibility across the elements of share repurchases, 
dividends and acquisitions. The amount of prospective returns 
to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases 
will vary based upon several factors including each year’s 
operating results, capital expenditure requirements, research and 
development investments and acquisitions, as well as the factors 
discussed on page 62. As a result of the proposed transaction 
to acquire Red Hat, subject to closing, the company intends to 
suspend its share repurchase program in 2020 and 2021.
The company’s Board of Directors considers the dividend 
payment on a quarterly basis. In the second quarter of 2018, the 
Board of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common 
stock dividend from $1.50 to $1.57 per share.
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP
 
$15.2
$16.7
$17.1 
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables
(0.3)
0.4
1.7
Net cash from operating activities,  
excluding Global Financing receivables
15.6
16.3
15.4
Capital expenditures, net
(3.7)
(3.3)
(3.7)
Free cash flow (FCF)
11.9
13.0
11.7
Acquisitions
(0.1)
(0.5)
(5.7)
Divestitures
—
(0.2)
(0.5)
Share repurchase
(4.4)
(4.3)
(3.5)
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.1)
Dividends
(5.7)
(5.5)
(5.3)
Non-Global Financing debt
(0.5)
1.1
1.3
Other (includes Global Financing receivables  
and Global Financing debt) 
(1.6)
0.8*
2.4*
Change in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and 
short-term marketable securities
$ (0.6)
$  4.1*
$  0.4*
FCF as percent of Income from Continuing Operations
136%**
226%**
98%
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash.
**	111% in 2018 excluding charges of $2.0 billion and 116% in 2017 excluding the charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of  
U.S. tax reform.


===== PAGE 63 =====
62
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow 
dynamics discussed previously include significant changes 
in operating results, material changes in geographic sources 
of cash, unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future 
pension funding requirements during periods of severe downturn 
in the capital markets or the timing of tax payments. Whether 
any litigation has such an adverse impact will depend on a 
number of variables, which are more completely described in 
note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 115 to 
117. With respect to pension funding, in 2018, the company 
contributed $363  million to its non-U.S. defined benefit 
plans compared to $409 million in 2017. As highlighted in the 
Contractual Obligations table, the company expects to make 
legally mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. 
plans of approximately $1.8 billion in the next five years. The 
2019 contributions are currently expected to be approximately 
$400 million. Contributions related to all retirement-related 
plans are expected to be approximately $2.4 billion in 2019, 
an increase of approximately $100 million compared to 2018. 
Financial market performance could increase the legally 
mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. countries 
that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. 
The company is not quantifying any further impact from pension 
funding because it is not possible to predict future movements in 
the capital markets or pension plan funding regulations.
In 2019, the company is not legally required to make any 
contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
The company’s cash flows are sufficient to fund its current 
operations and obligations, including investing and financing 
activities such as dividends and debt service. When additional 
requirements arise, the company has several liquidity options 
available. These options may include the ability to borrow 
additional funds at reasonable interest rates and utilizing its 
committed global credit facilities.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual 
Payment Stream
Payments Due In
2019
2020–21
2022–23
After 2023
Long-term debt obligations
$43,155
$  7,048
$13,914
$  7,736
$14,457
Interest on long-term debt obligations
9,260
1,175
1,784
1,243
5,059
Capital (finance) lease obligations
41
3
5
5
28
Operating lease obligations
5,628
1,581
2,147
1,085
815
Purchase obligations
3,171
1,079
1,114
776
202
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit plan pension funding 
(mandated)*
1,800
400
700
700
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
1,581
201
441
493
446
Long-term termination benefits
991
179
143
114
555
Tax reserves**
4,172
551
Other
1,410
211
363
153
683
Total
$71,209
$12,427
$20,611
$12,305
$22,245
*	 As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2023 could not be reasonably estimated.
**	These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $551 million of the liability is 
expected to be settled within the next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably 
estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected 
to be due within the next 12 months. 


===== PAGE 64 =====
63
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total contractual obligations are reported in the previous table 
excluding the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal 
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the 
previous table as their future cash outflows are uncertain. This 
includes deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability 
benefits and other sundry items. Certain obligations related to 
the company’s divestitures are included.
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase goods 
or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet any 
of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the 
company would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, 
or (3) the company must make specified minimum payments 
even if it does not take delivery of the contracted products or 
services (take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or 
services is noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is 
included in the previous table. If the obligation is cancelable, 
but the company would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar 
amount of the penalty is included as a purchase obligation. 
Contracted minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts 
are also included in the table as they represent the portion of 
each contract that is a firm commitment.
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into 
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a 
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or 
service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally 
entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. 
They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased 
and, therefore, the company does not consider them to be 
purchase obligations.
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the 
effective interest rate at December 31, 2018, plus the interest 
rate spread associated with that debt, if any. 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet 
arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release 
67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and 
Analysis about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate 
Contractual Obligations.”
At December 31, 2018, the company had no off-balance sheet 
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material 
current or future effect on the company’s financial condition, 
changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of 
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. See 
the table on page 62 for the company’s contractual obligations, and 
note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 115 to 117, 
for detailed information about the company’s guarantees, financial 
commitments and indemnification arrangements. The company does 
not have retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated 
entities or other material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires the company to make estimates 
and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly 
affect its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and 
assumptions discussed in this section are those that the company 
considers to be the most critical to its financial statements. An 
accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the 
estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity 
and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable 
range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to the 
company’s financial condition. Senior management has discussed 
the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with 
the Audit Committee of the company’s Board of Directors. The 
company’s significant accounting policies are described in note A, 
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 88.
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that 
information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and 
provides material information to investors. The amounts used to 
assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to 
allow users of the Annual Report to understand a general direction 
cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent 
management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, 
it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as 
forecasted, and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
Pension Assumptions
For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the 
measurement of the benefit obligation to plan participants and 
net periodic pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain 
assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount 
rates and expected return on plan assets.
Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the 
(gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the 
net periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected 
benefit obligation (PBO). The company increased the discount 
rate assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-
based defined benefit plan, by 70 basis points to 4.10 percent on 
December 31, 2018. This change will decrease pre-tax income 
recognized in 2019 by an estimated $17 million. If the discount 
rate assumption for the PPP had decreased by 70 basis points on 
December 31, 2018, pre-tax income recognized in 2019 would 
have increased by an estimated $50 million. Further changes in 
the discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which, in 
turn, may impact the company’s funding decisions if the PBO 
exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the 
discount rate would cause a corresponding decrease or increase, 
respectively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.1 billion based 
upon December 31, 2018 data.
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is used 
in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. Expected 
returns on plan assets are calculated based on the market-
related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the 
fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in 
the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension 
(income)/cost. The differences between the actual return on 
plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets 


===== PAGE 65 =====
64
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
are recognized over five years in the expected return on plan 
assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a 
component of actuarial (gains)/losses, which are recognized over 
the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending 
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are 
based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as 
provided by accounting standards.
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such 
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in 
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption 
would have an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, of 
$248 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension 
(income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, 
2018 and assuming no contributions are made in 2019).
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required, 
by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual 
results that differ from the estimates may result in more or less 
future company funding into the pension plans than is planned 
by management. Impacts of these types of changes on the 
company’s pension plans in other countries worldwide would 
vary depending upon the status of each respective plan.
In addition to the above, the company evaluates other pension 
assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement 
age and mortality, and updates these assumptions to reflect 
experience and expectations for the future. Actual results in 
any given year can differ from actuarial assumptions because of 
economic and other factors.
For additional information on the company’s pension plans and 
the development of these assumptions, see note T, “Retirement-
Related Benefits,” on pages 127 to 141.
Revenue Recognition
Application of GAAP related to the measurement and recognition 
of revenue requires the company to make judgments and 
estimates. Specifically, complex arrangements with nonstandard 
terms and conditions may require significant contract 
interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting, including 
whether promised goods and services specified in an arrangement 
are distinct performance obligations. Other significant judgments 
include determining whether IBM or a reseller is acting as the 
principal in a transaction and whether separate contracts should 
be combined and considered part of one arrangement.
Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability 
to determine when a contract is probable of collection and to 
estimate variable consideration, including, for example, rebates, 
volume discounts, service-level penalties, and performance 
bonuses. The company considers various factors when making 
these judgments, including a review of specific transactions, 
historical experience and market and economic conditions. 
Evaluations are conducted each quarter to assess the adequacy 
of the estimates. If the estimates were changed by 10 percent 
in 2018, the impact on net income would have been immaterial.
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
The company enters into numerous service contracts through 
its services businesses. During the contractual period, 
revenue, cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the 
ultimate profitability of each contract, especially contracts for 
which the company uses cost-to-cost measures of progress 
(i.e. percentage-of-completion (POC) method of accounting). If 
at any time these estimates indicate the POC contract will be 
unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the 
contract is recorded immediately in cost. The company performs 
ongoing profitability analyses of its POC-based services contracts 
in order to determine whether the latest estimates require 
updating. Key factors reviewed by the company to estimate the 
future costs to complete each contract are future labor costs and 
product costs and expected productivity efficiencies. Contract 
loss provisions recorded as a component of other accrued 
expenses and liabilities were $24 million and $25 million at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Income Taxes
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous 
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in 
determining the consolidated provision for income taxes.
During the ordinary course of business, there are many 
transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax 
determination is uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes 
tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and 
interest will be due. These tax liabilities are recognized when, 
despite the company’s belief that its tax return positions are 
supportable, the company believes that certain positions may not 
be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. The company 
believes that its accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open 
audit years based on its assessment of many factors, including 
past experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment 
relies on estimates and assumptions, and may involve a series 
of complex judgments about future events. To the extent that 
new information becomes available which causes the company 
to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax 
liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax 
expense in the period in which such determination is made.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation 
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing 
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all 
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating 
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of 
ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event that the company 
changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax 
assets that can be realized, the company will adjust its valuation 
allowance with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in 
the period in which such determination is made.
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period 
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement 
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring 
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, 
state and local taxes and the effects of various global income 
tax strategies.


===== PAGE 66 =====
65
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations 
before income taxes, consolidated net income would have 
decreased/improved by $113 million in 2018.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment 
accounting requires the use of significant estimates and 
assumptions. The acquisition method of accounting for business 
combinations requires the company to estimate the fair value 
of assets acquired including separately identifiable intangible 
assets, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in 
the acquiree to properly allocate purchase price consideration. 
Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-
lived intangible assets, requires the allocation of cash flows to 
those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair 
value for the assets or group of assets. The company’s estimates 
are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which 
are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations 
require the use of management’s assumptions, which would not 
reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
Valuation of Goodwill
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and 
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the 
carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. In 2018, 
the company assessed the qualitative risk factors to determine 
whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting 
unit is less than its carrying amount. 
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its 
reporting units that carry goodwill including relevant events 
and circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units. 
Examples include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic, 
industry and market conditions, as well as other individual factors 
such as:
•	 A loss of key personnel;
•	 A significant adverse shift in the operating environment of 
the reporting unit such as unanticipated competition;
•	 A significant pending litigation;
•	 A more likely than not expectation that a reporting unit or a 
significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise 
disposed of; and
•	 An adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine 
whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative 
goodwill impairment test. This quantitative test is required only 
if the company concludes that it is more likely than not that a 
reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. After 
performing the annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis 
during the fourth quarter of 2018, the company determined it was 
not necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.
Loss Contingencies
The company is currently involved in various claims and legal 
proceedings. At least quarterly, the company reviews the status 
of each significant matter and assesses its potential financial 
exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is 
considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, 
the company accrues a liability for the estimated loss. Significant 
judgment is required in both the determination of probability 
and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably 
estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these matters, 
accruals are based only on the best information available at the 
time. As additional information becomes available, the company 
reassesses the potential liability related to its pending claims and 
litigation, and may revise its estimates. These revisions in the 
estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact 
on the company’s results of operations and financial position. 
Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses 
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables 
port­folio on a regular basis in order to assess collectibility and 
records adjustments to the allowance for credit losses at least 
quarterly. A description of the methods used by management 
to estimate the amount of uncollectible receivables is included 
in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 88. 
Factors that could result in actual receivable losses that are 
materially different from the estim­ated reserve include significant 
changes in the economy, or a sudden change in the economic 
health of a significant client that represents a concentration in 
Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s 
estimates currently provided for by 10  percent, Global 
Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s income 
from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher 
or lower by an estimated $29 million depending upon whether 
the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than 
the estimates.
Residual Value
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment 
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates 
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as 
operating or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair 
value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing 
the current market for new and used equipment, and obtaining 
forward-looking product information such as marketing plans 
and technological innovations. Residual value estimates are 
periodically reviewed and “other than temporary” declines 
in estimated future residual values are recognized upon 
identification. Anticipated increases in future residual values 
are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. 
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from 
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment 
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations 
and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment.


===== PAGE 67 =====
66
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than 
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s 
segment pre-tax income and the company’s income from 
continuing operations before income taxes for 2018 would have 
been lower by an estimated $70 million. If the actual residual 
value recovery is higher than management’s estimates, the 
increase in income will be realized at the end of lease when the 
equipment is remarketed.
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the 
U.S. dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial 
position. At December 31, 2018, currency changes resulted 
in assets and liabilities denominated in local currencies being 
translated into fewer dollars than at year-end 2017. The company 
uses financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks 
related to financing transactions and other foreign currency-
based transactions. 
During periods of sustained movements in currency, the 
marketplace and competition adjust to the changing rates. For 
example, when pricing offerings in the marketplace, the company 
may use some of the advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to 
improve its position competitively, and price more aggressively to 
win the business, essentially passing on a portion of the currency 
advantage to its customers. Competition will frequently take the 
same action. Consequently, the company believes that some of 
the currency-based changes in cost impact the prices charged to 
clients. The company also maintains currency hedging programs 
for cash management purposes which temporarily mitigate, 
but do not eliminate, the volatility of currency impacts on the 
company’s financial results. 
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. 
References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” 
reflect adjustments based upon a simple mathematical formula. 
However, this constant currency methodology that the company 
utilizes to disclose this information does not incorporate any 
operational actions that management could take to mitigate 
fluctuating currency rates. Currency movements impacted the 
company’s year-to-year revenue and earnings per share growth 
in 2018. Based on the currency rate movements in 2018, total 
revenue increased 0.6 percent as reported and was flat at 
constant currency versus 2017. On an income from continuing 
operations before income taxes basis, these translation impacts 
offset by the net impact of hedging activities resulted in a 
theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing or sourcing actions) 
increase of approximately $300 million in 2018, on both an 
as-reported basis and operating (non-GAAP) basis. The same 
mathematical exercise resulted in an increase of approximately 
$100 million in 2017 on an as-reported basis and an operating 
(non-GAAP) basis. The company views these amounts as 
a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported financial 
results. Considering the operational responses mentioned 
above, movements of exchange rates, and the nature and timing 
of hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency 
impacts on any particular period, but the company believes it 
could be substantially less than the theoretical maximum given 
the competitive pressure in the marketplace.
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. 
dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, 
translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations. 
Generally, the company manages currency risk in these entities 
by linking prices and contracts to U.S. dollars. 
During 2018 there were reported economic events impacting 
the Argentinean economy, such as significant depreciation 
of the Argentine peso, increases in interest rates and the 
Argentine government requesting financial assistance from the 
International Monetary Fund. The three-year cumulative inflation 
rates, using a combination of monthly indices, exceeded the 100 
percent threshold for hyperinflation. As a result, effective July 1, 
2018, the company changed the functional currency from local 
currency to U.S. dollar functional for Argentina with no material 
impact. The ongoing impact from the change is not expected to 
be material given the size of the company’s operations in the 
country (less than 1 percent of total 2018 revenue).
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, the financial position of 
the company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In 
addition to the market risk associated with interest rate and 
currency movements on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar 
denominated assets and liabilities, other examples of risk include 
collectibility of accounts receivable and recoverability of residual 
values on leased assets.
The company regularly assesses these risks and has established 
policies and business practices to protect against the adverse 
effects of these and other potential exposures. As a result, the 
company does not anticipate any material losses from these risks.
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business 
and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, 
contains an element of market risk from changes in interest and 
currency rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through 
the use of a variety of financial instruments including derivatives, 
as described in note D, “Financial Instruments—Derivative 
Financial Instruments,” on pages 97 to 102.
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a 
sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk 
exposures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt 
and other financial instruments.
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity 
analysis are comprised of the company’s cash and cash 
equivalents, marketable securities, short-term and long-term 
loans, commercial financing and installment payment receivables, 
investments, long-term and short-term debt and derivative 
financial instruments. The company’s derivative financial 
instruments generally include interest rate swaps, foreign 
currency swaps and forward contracts.


===== PAGE 68 =====
67
Management Discussion 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the risk of 
loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in interest 
rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-sensitive 
instruments. The market values for interest and foreign currency 
exchange risk are computed based on the present value of future 
cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that are attributable 
to the market risk being measured. The discount rates used for the 
present value computations were selected based on market interest 
and foreign currency exchange rates in effect at December 31, 2018 
and 2017. The differences in this comparison are the hypothetical 
gains or losses associated with each type of risk.
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not 
necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the 
company would incur under normal market conditions because, 
due to practical limitations, all variables other than the specific 
market risk factor are held constant. In addition, the results 
of the model are constrained by the fact that certain items 
are specifically excluded from the analysis, while the financial 
instruments relating to the financing or hedging of those items 
are included by definition. Excluded items include short-term 
and long-term receivables from sales-type and direct financing 
leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and the company’s 
net investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, reported 
changes in the values of some of the financial instruments 
impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not matched 
with the offsetting changes in the values of the items that those 
instruments are designed to finance or hedge.
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2018 and 
2017, are as follows: 
Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2018, a 10 percent decrease in the levels 
of interest rates with all other variables held constant would 
result in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial 
instruments of $422 million as compared with a decrease of 
$201 million at December 31, 2017. A 10 percent increase in 
the levels of interest rates with all other variables held constant 
would result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s 
financial instruments of $408 million as compared to an increase 
of $232 million at December 31, 2017. Changes in the relative 
sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s financial instrument 
portfolio for these theoretical changes in the level of interest 
rates are primarily driven by changes in the company’s debt 
maturities, interest rate profile and amount. 
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
At December 31, 2018, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against 
foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would 
result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial 
instruments of $697 million as compared with an increase of 
$363 million at December 31, 2017. Conversely, a 10 percent 
stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies, with all other 
variables held constant, would result in a decrease in the fair 
value of the company’s financial instruments of $697 million 
compared with a decrease of $363 million at December 31, 2017. 
Financing Risks
See the “Description of Business” on page 25 for a discussion of 
the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business 
and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
Cybersecurity
While cybersecurity risk can never be completely eliminated, the 
company’s approach draws on the depth and breadth of its global 
capabilities, both in terms of its offerings to clients and its internal 
approaches to risk management. The company offers commercial 
solutions that deliver capabilities in areas such as identity and 
access management, data security, application security, network 
security and endpoint security. IBM’s solutions include pervasive 
encryption, security intelligence, analytics, cognitive and artificial 
intelligence, and forensic tools that can process information on 
customer IT security events and vulnerabilities and provide 
detailed information to customers about potential threats and 
security posture. The company also offers professional consulting 
and technical services solutions for security from assessment 
and incident response to deployment and resource augmentation. 
In addition, the company offers managed and outsourced 
security solutions from multiple security operations centers 
around the world. Finally, security is embedded in a multitude 
of IBM products and offerings through secure engineering and 
operations, and by critical functions (encryption, access control, 
etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.
From an enterprise perspective, IBM implements a multi-faceted 
risk-management approach to identify and address cybersecurity 
risks. The company has established policies and procedures that 
provide the foundation upon which IBM’s infrastructure and data 
are managed. IBM performs ongoing assessments regarding its 
technical controls and its methods for identifying emerging risks 
related to cybersecurity. The company uses a layered approach 
with overlapping controls to defend against cybersecurity attacks 
and threats on networks, end-user devices, servers, applications, 
data and cloud solutions. The company also has a security 
monitoring program and a global incident response process to 
respond to cybersecurity threats and attacks. In addition, the 
company utilizes a combination of online training, educational 
tools, videos and other awareness initiatives to foster a culture 
of security awareness and responsibility among its workforce.
Employees and Related Workforce
(In thousands)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries
350.6
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries
9.4
Complementary
21.1
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in 
more than 175 countries and is continuing to shift its business 
to the higher value segments of enterprise IT. The company 
continues to remix its skills and people needs to match the best 
opportunities in the marketplace. 
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent 
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and 
limited-term employment arrangements to meet specific 
business needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.


===== PAGE 69 =====
68
Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility 
for Financial Information
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial 
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM 
management. The accompanying financial statements have been 
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain 
estimates and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, 
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines 
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive 
systems and control procedures. An important element of the 
control environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our 
system also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions 
are taken to correct deficiencies as they are identified.
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, 
we carefully select and train our employees, develop and 
disseminate written policies and procedures, provide appropriate 
communication channels and foster an environment conducive to 
the effective functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential 
for the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance 
with the highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM 
Business Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into 
numerous languages, are distributed to employees throughout 
the world, and reemphasized through internal programs to assure 
that they are understood and followed. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed 
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is 
responsible for recommending to the Board the independent 
registered public accounting firm to be retained for the coming 
year, subject to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee 
meets regularly and privately with the independent registered 
public accounting firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as 
well as with IBM management, to review accounting, auditing, 
internal control structure and financial reporting matters. 
Management’s Report on Internal Control 
Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining 
adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company. 
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to 
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external 
purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America.
The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes 
those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance 
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect 
the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; 
(ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded 
as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in 
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the 
United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures 
of the company are being made only in accordance with 
authorizations of management and directors of the company; 
and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or 
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition 
of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the 
financial statements. 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over 
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. 
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future 
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become 
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree 
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of 
internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria 
established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013) 
issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation, 
management concluded that the company’s internal control 
over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2018.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public 
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial 
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over 
financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits 
conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public 
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). 
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 26, 2019
James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 26, 2019


===== PAGE 70 =====
69
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of  
International Business Machines Corporation:
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control 
Over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position of International Business Machines Corporation 
and its subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2018 
and 2017, and the related Consolidated Statements of Earnings, 
Comprehensive Income, Changes in Equity, and Cash Flows 
for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 
2018, including the related notes (collectively referred to as 
the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited 
the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of 
December 31, 2018, based on criteria established in Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to 
above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position 
of the Company as of December 31, 2018 and 2017, and the 
results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three 
years in the period ended December 31, 2018 in conformity with 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States 
of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all 
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting 
as of December 31, 2018, based on criteria established in Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.
Basis for Opinions
The Company’s management is responsible for these 
consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective 
internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment 
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, 
included in the accompanying Management’s Report on 
Internal Control over Financial Reporting appearing on page 
68. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s 
consolidated financial statements and on the Company’s internal 
control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a 
public accounting firm registered with the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and 
are required to be independent with respect to the Company 
in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the 
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of 
the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform 
the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether 
the consolidated financial statements are free of material 
misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether 
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained 
in all material respects. 
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included 
performing procedures to assess the risks of material 
misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether 
due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond 
to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test 
basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the 
consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included 
evaluating the accounting principles used and significant 
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the 
overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. 
Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included 
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial 
reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and 
testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness 
of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also 
included performing such other procedures as we considered 
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits 
provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over  
Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process 
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial 
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control 
over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures 
that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable 
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and 
dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable 
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to 
permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and 
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance 
with authorizations of management and directors of the company; 
and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or 
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition 
of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the 
financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over 
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. 
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future 
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become 
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree 
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
New York, New York 
February 26, 2019
We, or firms that we have ultimately acquired, have served as 
the Company’s auditor since 1923. For the period from 1923 to 
1958, the Company was audited by firms that a predecessor firm 
to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP ultimately acquired.


===== PAGE 71 =====
70
Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2018
2017
2016
Revenue
Services
$51,350
$50,709 
$51,268 
Sales
26,641
26,715
26,942
Financing
1,599
1,715
1,710
Total revenue
O
79,591
79,139
79,919
Cost
Services
34,059
33,811*
33,792*
Sales
7,464
7,175*
6,566*
Financing
1,132
1,210
1,044
Total cost
42,655
42,196*
41,403*
Gross profit
36,936
36,943*
38,516*
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative
19,366
19,680*
20,869*
Research, development and engineering
P
5,379
5,590*
5,726*
Intellectual property and custom development income
(1,026)
(1,466)
(1,631)
Other (income) and expense
1,152
1,125*
593*
Interest expense
D&J
723
615
630
Total expense and other (income)
25,594
25,543*
26,186*
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
11,342
11,400
12,330
Provision for income taxes
N
2,619
5,642
449
Income from continuing operations
8,723
5,758
11,881
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
5
(5)
(9)
Net income 
$  8,728
$  5,753 
$11,872 
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations
Q
$    9.51
$    6.14
$  12.39
Discontinued operations
Q
0.01
0.00
(0.01)
Total 
Q
$    9.52
$    6.14 
$  12.38 
Basic
Continuing operations
Q
$    9.56
$    6.17
$  12.44
Discontinued operations
Q
0.01
0.00
(0.01)
Total 
Q
$    9.57
$    6.17 
$  12.43 
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
916,315,714
937,385,625
958,714,097
Basic
912,048,072
932,828,295
955,422,530
*  Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit costs. 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 72 =====
71
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2018
2017
2016
Net income
$ 8,728
$5,753
$11,872 
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments
L
(730)
152
(20)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
(2)
1
(38)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
—
1
34
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
(2)
2
(3)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
(136)
(58)
243
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
449
(363)
102
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
313
(421)
345
Retirement-related benefit plans
L
Prior service costs/(credits)
(182)
0
—
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(2,517)
682
(2,490)
Curtailments and settlements
11
19
(16)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
(73)
(88)
(107)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,966
2,889
2,764
Total retirement-related benefit plans
204
3,502
150
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
L
(215)
3,235
472
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items  
of other comprehensive income
L
(262)
(429)
(263)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
L
(476)
2,806
209
Total comprehensive income
$ 8,252
$8,559
$12,081 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 73 =====
72
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31:
Notes
2018
2017
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$   11,379
$   11,972
Restricted cash
225
262*
Marketable securities
D
618
608
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of  
$309 in 2018 and $297 in 2017)
7,432
8,928
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $244 in 2018 and $261 in 2017)
F
22,388
21,721
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $38 in 2018 and $36 in 2017)
743
981
Inventories
E
1,682
1,583
Deferred costs
O
2,300
1,820**
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
2,378
1,860* **
Total current assets
49,146
49,735
Property, plant and equipment
G
32,460
32,331
Less: Accumulated depreciation
G
21,668
21,215
Property, plant and equipment—net
G
10,792
11,116
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $48 in 2018 and $74 in 2017)
F
9,148
9,550
Prepaid pension assets
T
4,666
4,643
Deferred costs
O
2,676
2,136**
Deferred taxes
N
5,216
4,862
Goodwill
I
36,265
36,788
Intangible assets—net
I
3,087
3,742
Investments and sundry assets
H
2,386
2,783**
Total assets
$ 123,382 
$ 125,356 
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes
N
$     3,046
$     4,219
Short-term debt
D&J
10,207
6,987
Accounts payable
6,558
6,451
Compensation and benefits
3,310
3,644
Deferred income
11,165
11,552
Other accrued expenses and liabilities
3,941
4,510
Total current liabilities
38,227
37,363
Long-term debt
D&J
35,605
39,837
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations
T
17,002
16,720
Deferred income
3,445
3,746
Other liabilities
K
12,174
9,965
Total liabilities
106,452
107,631
Contingencies and commitments
M
Equity
L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital
55,151
54,566
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2018—2,233,427,058; 2017—2,229,428,813)
Retained earnings
159,206
153,126
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2018—1,340,947,648; 2017—1,307,249,588)
(168,071)
(163,507)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(29,490)
(26,592)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity
16,796
17,594
Noncontrolling interests
A
134
131
Total equity
16,929
17,725
Total liabilities and equity
$ 123,382 
$ 125,356 
**Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash. 
**Recast to conform to current period presentation. 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 74 =====
73
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income 
$   8,728
$  5,753
$11,872
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation
3,127
3,021
2,837
Amortization of intangibles
1,353
1,520
1,544
Stock-based compensation
510
534
544
Deferred taxes
853
(931)
(1,132)
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other
123
14
62
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables)
1,006
1,297
712
Retirement related
1,368
1,014
54
Inventories
(127)
18
(14)
Other assets/other liabilities
(1,819)
4,437
408
Accounts payable
126
47
197
Net cash provided by operating activities
15,247
16,724
17,084
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment
(3,395)
(3,229)
(3,567)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment
248
460
424
Investment in software
(569)
(544)
(583)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments
(7,041)
(4,949)*
(5,853)*
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments
6,487
3,910
5,692
Non-operating finance receivables—net
(503)
(2,028)
(891)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired
(139)
(496)
(5,696)*
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred
—
(205)
(454)
Net cash used in investing activities
(4,913)
(7,081)*
(10,928)*
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt
6,891
9,643
9,132
Payments to settle debt
(8,533)
(6,816)
(6,395)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net
1,341
620
26
Common stock repurchases
(4,443)
(4,340)
(3,502)
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings
(171)
(193)
(126)
Financing—other
111
175
204
Cash dividends paid
(5,666)
(5,506)
(5,256)
Net cash used in financing activities
(10,469)
(6,418)
(5,917)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
(495)
937
(51)
Net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
(630)
4,161*
188*
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at January 1
12,234
8,073*
7,885*
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at December 31
$ 11,604
$12,234*
$  8,073*
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received
$   1,745
$  1,597
$  1,078
Interest paid on debt
$   1,423
$  1,208
$  1,158
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 75 =====
74
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2016
Equity, January 1, 2016
$53,262
$146,124
$(155,518)
$(29,607)
$14,262 
$162
$14,424
Net income plus other 
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income
11,872
11,872
11,872
Other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
209
209
209
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$12,081
$12,081
Cash dividends paid—	 
common stock ($5.50 per share)
(5,256)
(5,256)
(5,256)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans  
(3,893,366 shares)
695
695
695
Purchases (854,365 shares)  
and sales (383,077 shares)  
of treasury stock under  
employee plans—net
18
(77)
(59)
(59)
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (23,283,400 shares)
(3,455)
(3,455)
(3,455)
Changes in other equity
(22)
0
(22)
(22)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(16)
(16)
Equity, December 31, 2016
$53,935
$152,759
$(159,050)
$(29,398)
$18,246
$146
$18,392
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2017
Equity, January 1, 2017
$53,935
$152,759
$(159,050)
$(29,398)
$18,246 
$146
$18,392
Cumulative effect of change in 
accounting principle*
102
102
102
Net income plus other 
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income
5,753
5,753
5,753
Other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
2,806
2,806
2,806
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$  8,559
$  8,559
Cash dividends paid—	 
common stock ($5.90 per share)
(5,506)
(5,506)
(5,506)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans  
(4,311,998 shares)
631
631
631
Purchases (1,226,080 shares)  
and sales (463,083 shares)  
of treasury stock under  
employee plans—net
18
(134)
(116)
(116)
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (27,237,179 shares)
(4,323)
(4,323)
(4,323)
Changes in other equity
0
0
0
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(15)
(15)
Equity, December 31, 2017
$54,566
$153,126
$(163,507)
$(26,592)
$17,594
$131
$17,725
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on intra-entity transfers of assets.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 76 =====
75
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2018
Equity, January 1, 2018
$54,566
$153,126
$(163,507)
$(26,592)
$17,594 
$131
$17,725
Cumulative effect of changes in 
accounting principle
Revenue*
580
580
580
Stranded tax effects/other*
2,422
(2,422)
Net income plus other 
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income
8,728
8,728
8,728
Other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
(476)
(476)
(476)
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$  8,252
$  8,252
Cash dividends paid—
	
common stock ($6.21 per share)
(5,666)
(5,666)
(5,666)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans  
(3,998,245 shares)
585
585
585
Purchases (1,173,416 shares)  
and sales (424,589 shares)  
of treasury stock under  
employee plans—net
15
(117)
(103)
(103)
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (32,949,233 shares)
(4,447)
(4,447)
(4,447)
Changes in other equity
0
0
0
0
Changes in noncontrolling interests
3
3
Equity, December 31, 2018
$55,151
$159,206
$(168,071)
$(29,490)
$16,796
$134
$16,929
*	 Reflects the adoption of FASB guidance. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes.”
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 77 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
76
NOTE A. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and 
footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation 
(IBM or the company) have been prepared in accordance with 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of 
America (GAAP).
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain 
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded 
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are 
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain 
prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the 
current year presentation. This is annotated where applicable.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (U.S. tax 
reform) was enacted in the U.S. This Act introduced many 
changes, including lowering the U.S. corporate tax rate to 21 
percent, changes in incentives, provisions to prevent U.S. base 
erosion and significant changes in the taxation of international 
income, including provisions which allow for the repatriation of 
foreign earnings without U.S. tax.
The enactment of U.S. tax reform resulted in a provisional charge 
of $5.5 billion to tax expense in the fourth-quarter and year-
ended December 31, 2017. The charge was primarily the result 
of the one-time U.S. transition tax, and any foreign tax costs on 
undistributed foreign earnings, as well as the remeasurement 
of deferred tax balances to the new U.S. federal tax rate. During 
the fourth quarter of 2018, the accounting for impacts of U.S. 
tax reform was completed and the effects of measurement 
period adjustments were recognized as a charge to tax expense 
of $1.9 billion and $2.0 billion in the fourth quarter and year 
ended December 31, 2018, respectively. The 2018 charges were 
primarily attributable to the election to include Global Intangible 
Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) in measuring deferred taxes, in 
addition to refinements to the one-time U.S. transition tax and 
foreign tax costs on undistributed foreign earnings. Refer to note 
N, “Taxes,” on pages 117 to 119 for additional information.
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $17 million, $17 million and $16 
million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 
and 2016, respectively, are included as a reduction within other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of 
IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority 
owned. Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary 
is reported in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling 
interest is reported as described above in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. The accounts of variable interest entities 
(VIEs) are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if 
required. Investments in business entities in which the company 
does not have control, but has the ability to exercise significant 
influence over operating and financial policies, are accounted for 
using the equity method and the company’s proportionate share 
of income or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. The 
accounting policy for other investments in equity securities is 
described on pages 86 and 87 within “Marketable Securities.” 
Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities lacking 
controlling financial interest or significant influence are primarily 
measured at cost, net of impairment, if any. All intercompany 
transactions and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP 
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that 
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses 
and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are reported 
in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying 
disclosures. These estimates are based on management’s best 
knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions 
that the company may undertake in the future and on various 
other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the 
circumstances. As a result, actual results may be different from 
these estimates. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” on pages 63 
to 66 for a discussion of the company’s critical accounting estimates.
Revenue
Effective January 1, 2018, the company adopted the new 
accounting standard related to the recognition of revenue in 
contracts with customers under the modified retrospective 
transition method. This method was applied to contracts that 
were not complete as of the date of initial application. The 
impact related to adopting the new standard was not material. 
Certain changes resulting from adopting the new standard, 
such as terminology differences, impacted the company’s 
description of its significant accounting policies in 2018. 
For further information regarding the adoption of the new standard, 
see note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 89 to 91, and 
note O, “Revenue Recognition,” on pages 120 to 122.
The company accounts for a contract with a client when it has 
written approval, the contract is committed, the rights of the 
parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has 
commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, control of a promised product 
or service transfers to a client, in an amount that reflects the 
consideration to which the company expects to be entitled 
in exchange for transferring those products or services. If 
the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable 
amount, the company estimates the amount to which it expects 
to be entitled using either the expected value or most likely 
amount method. The company’s contracts may include terms 
that could cause variability in the transaction price, including, 
for example, rebates, volume discounts, service-level penalties, 
and performance bonuses or other forms of contingent revenue.


===== PAGE 78 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
77
The company only includes estimated amounts in the 
transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant 
reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when 
the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is 
resolved. The company may not be able to reliably estimate 
contingent revenue in certain long-term arrangements due to 
uncertainties that are not expected to be resolved for a long 
period of time or when the company’s experience with similar 
types of contracts is limited. The company’s arrangements 
infrequently include contingent revenue. Estimates of variable 
consideration and the determination of whether to include 
estimated amounts in the transaction price are based on 
all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is 
reasonably available to the company, taking into consideration 
the type of client, the type of transaction and the specific facts 
and circumstances of each arrangement. Changes in estimates 
of variable consideration are included in note O, “Revenue 
Recognition,” on pages 120 to 122.
The company’s standard billing terms are that payment is due upon 
receipt of invoice, payable within 30 days. Invoices are generally 
issued as control transfers and/or as services are rendered. 
Additionally, in determining the transaction price, the company 
adjusts the promised amount of consideration for the effects of 
the time value of money if the billing terms are not standard and 
the timing of payments agreed to by the parties to the contract 
provide the client or the company with a significant benefit 
of financing, in which case the contract contains a significant 
financing component. As a practical expedient, the company 
does not account for significant financing components if the period 
between when the company transfers the promised product or 
service to the client and when the client pays for that product or 
service will be one year or less. Most arrangements that contain a 
financing component are financed through the company’s Global 
Financing business and include explicit financing terms.
The company may include subcontractor services or third-party 
vendor equipment or software in certain integrated services 
arrangements. In these types of arrangements, revenue from 
sales of third-party vendor products or services is recorded 
net of costs when the company is acting as an agent between 
the client and the vendor, and gross when the company is the 
principal for the transaction. To determine whether the company 
is an agent or principal, the company considers whether it obtains 
control of the products or services before they are transferred 
to the customer. In making this evaluation, several factors are 
considered, most notably whether the company has primary 
responsibility for fulfillment to the client, as well as inventory 
risk and pricing discretion.
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers, 
resellers and distributors (herein referred to as resellers) when 
the reseller has economic substance apart from the company 
and the reseller is considered the principal for the transaction 
with the end-user client.
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes 
assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and 
concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions.
In addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following 
are the specific revenue recognition policies for arrangements 
with multiple performance obligations and for each major 
category of revenue.
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
The company’s global capabilities as a cognitive solutions and 
cloud platform company include services, software, hardware 
and related financing. The company enters into revenue 
arrangements that may consist of any combination of these 
products and services based on the needs of its clients. For 
example, a client may purchase a server that includes operating 
system software. In addition, the arrangement may include 
post-contract support for the software and a contract for post-
warranty maintenance service for the hardware. These types 
of arrangements may also include financing provided by the 
company. These arrangements consist of multiple products and 
services, whereby the hardware and software may be delivered in 
one period and the software support and hardware maintenance 
services are delivered over time. In another example, the 
company may assist the client in building and running an 
enterprise information technology (IT) environment utilizing a 
private cloud on a long-term basis and the client periodically 
purchases hardware and/or software products from the company 
to upgrade or expand the facility. The services delivered on 
the cloud are provided on a continuous basis across multiple 
reporting periods, and the hardware and software products are 
provided in each period the products are purchased.
The company continues to build new products and offerings 
and continuously reinvent its platforms and delivery methods, 
including through the use of cloud and as-a-Service models. 
These are not separate businesses; they are offerings across 
the segments that address market opportunities in analytics, 
data, cloud and security. Revenue from these offerings follows 
the specific revenue recognition policies for arrangements with 
multiple performance obligations and for each major category of 
revenue, depending on the type of offering, which are comprised 
of services, hardware and/or software.
To the extent that a product or service in multiple performance 
obligation arrangements is subject to other specific accounting 
guidance, such as leasing guidance, that product or service is 
accounted for in accordance with such specific guidance. For all 
other products or services in these arrangements, the criteria 
below are considered to determine when the products or services 
are distinct and how to allocate the arrangement consideration to 
each distinct performance obligation. A performance obligation 
is a promise in a contract with a client to transfer products or 
services that are distinct. If the company enters into two or 


===== PAGE 79 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
78
more contracts at or near the same time, the contracts may 
be combined and accounted for as one contract, in which case 
the company determines whether the products or services in 
the combined contract are distinct. A product or service that is 
promised to a client is distinct if both of the following criteria 
are met:
•	 The client can benefit from the product or service either on 
its own or together with other resources that are readily 
available to the client (that is, the product or service is 
capable of being distinct); and 
•	 The company’s promise to transfer the product or service to 
the client is separately identifiable from other promises in 
the contract (that is, the product or service is distinct within 
the context of the contract). 
If these criteria are not met, the company determines an 
appropriate measure of progress based on the nature of 
its overall promise for the single performance obligation. 
When products and services are distinct, the arrangement 
consideration is allocated to each performance obligation on a 
relative standalone selling price basis. The revenue policies in 
the Services, Hardware and/or Software sections below are then 
applied to each performance obligation, as applicable.
To the extent the company grants the customer the option 
to acquire additional products or services in one of these 
arrangements, the company accounts for the option as a distinct 
performance obligation in the contract only if the option provides 
a material right to the customer that it would not receive without 
entering into the contract (e.g., a discount incremental to the 
range of discounts typically given for the product or service), in 
which case the client in effect pays in advance for the option to 
purchase future products or services. The company recognizes 
revenue when those future products or services are transferred 
or when the option expires. 
Services
The company’s primary services offerings include infrastructure 
services, including outsourcing, and other managed services; 
application management services; global process services 
(GPS); maintenance and support; and consulting, including the 
design and development of complex IT systems to a client’s 
specifications (e.g., design and build). Many of these services can 
be delivered entirely or partially through cloud or as-a-Service 
delivery models. The company’s services are provided on a time-
and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-price 
per measure of output contract and the contract terms range 
from less than one year to over 10 years.
In services arrangements, the company typically satisfies the 
performance obligation and recognizes revenue over time. In 
design and build arrangements, the performance obligation is 
satisfied over time either because the client controls the asset 
as it is created (e.g., when the asset is built at the customer site) 
or because the company’s performance does not create an asset 
with an alternative use and the company has an enforceable right 
to payment plus a reasonable profit for performance completed 
to date. In most other services arrangements, the performance 
obligation is satisfied over time because the client simultaneously 
receives and consumes the benefits provided as the company 
performs the services.
In outsourcing, other managed services, application 
management, GPS and other cloud-based services arrangements, 
the company determines whether the services performed during 
the initial phases of the arrangement, such as setup activities, are 
distinct. In most cases, the arrangement is a single performance 
obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are 
substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer 
(i.e., distinct days of service). The company applies a measure 
of progress (typically time-based) to any fixed consideration and 
allocates variable consideration to the distinct periods of service 
based on usage. As a result, revenue is generally recognized over 
the period the services are provided on a usage basis. This results 
in revenue recognition that corresponds with the value to the 
client of the services transferred to date relative to the remaining 
services promised.
Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized on an 
output basis as labor hours are delivered and/or direct expenses 
are incurred. Revenue from as-a-Service type contracts, such as 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service, is recognized either on a straight-
line basis or on a usage basis, depending on the terms of the 
arrangement (such as whether the company is standing ready to 
perform or whether the contract has usage-based metrics). If the 
as-a-Service contract includes setup activities, those promises in 
the arrangement are evaluated to determine if they are distinct.
Revenue related to maintenance and support services and 
extended warranty is recognized on a straight-line basis over the 
period of performance because the company is standing ready 
to provide services.
In fixed-price design and build contracts, revenue is recognized 
based on progress toward completion of the performance 
obligation using a cost-to-cost measure of progress (i.e., 
percentage-of-completion (POC) method of accounting). 
Revenue is recognized based on the labor costs incurred to 
date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill 
the contract. Due to the nature of the work performed in these 
arrangements, the estimation of cost at completion is complex, 
subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. 
Key factors reviewed by the company to estimate costs to 
complete each contract are future labor and product costs and 
expected productivity efficiencies. If circumstances arise that 
change the original estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of 
progress toward completion, revisions to the estimates are 
made. These revisions may result in increases or decreases in 
estimated revenues or costs, and such revisions are reflected in 
revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the 
circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known by 
the company. Refer to note O, “Revenue Recognition,” on pages 
120 to 122 for the amount of revenue recognized in the reporting 
period on a cumulative catch-up basis (i.e., from performance 
obligations satisfied, or partially satisfied, in previous periods).


===== PAGE 80 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
79
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its 
design and build services contracts accounted for using a cost-
to-cost measure of progress in order to determine whether the 
latest estimates of revenues, costs and profits require updating. 
If at any time these estimates indicate that the contract will be 
unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the 
contract is recorded immediately. For other types of services 
contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior 
to recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred 
income of $5,424 million and $5,870 million at December 31, 
2018 and 2017, respectively, is included in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position. In other services contracts, the 
company performs the services prior to billing the client. When 
the company performs services prior to billing the client in design 
and build contracts, the right to consideration is typically subject 
to milestone completion or client acceptance and, beginning 
January 1, 2018, the unbilled accounts receivable is classified 
as a contract asset. At December 31, 2018 and January 1, 2018, 
contract assets for services contracts of $421 million and $471 
million, respectively, are included in prepaid expenses and 
other current assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. The remaining amount of unbilled accounts receivable 
of $1,075 million and $1,756 million at December 31, 2018 and 
2017, respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable—
trade in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs 
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. 
Hardware
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of 
system servers and storage solutions. These products can also 
be delivered through as-a-Service or cloud delivery models, such 
as Storage-as-a-Service. The company also offers installation 
services for its more complex hardware products. Hardware 
offerings are often sold with distinct maintenance services, 
described under the Services section above.
Revenue from hardware sales is recognized when control has 
transferred to the customer which typically occurs when the 
hardware has been shipped to the client, risk of loss has transferred 
to the client and the company has a present right to payment for 
the hardware. In limited circumstances when a hardware sale 
includes client acceptance provisions, revenue is recognized either 
when client acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance 
provisions have lapsed, or the company has objective evidence 
that the criteria specified in the client acceptance provisions 
have been satisfied. Revenue from hardware sales-type leases 
is recognized at the beginning of the lease term. Revenue from 
rentals and operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis 
over the term of the rental or lease.
Revenue from as-a-Service arrangements is recognized either 
on a straight-line basis or on a usage basis as described in the 
Services section above. Installation services are accounted for 
as distinct performance obligations with revenue recognized as 
the services are performed. Any cost of standard warranties is 
accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. Shipping 
and handling activities that occur after the client has obtained 
control of a product are accounted for as an activity to fulfill 
the promise to transfer the product rather than as an additional 
promised service and, therefore, no revenue is deferred and 
recognized over the shipping period.
Software
The company’s software offerings include solutions software, 
which contains many of the company’s strategic areas including 
analytics, data and security; transaction processing software, 
which primarily runs mission-critical systems for clients; 
integration software, which helps clients to create, connect and 
optimize their applications data and infrastructure; and operating 
systems software, which provides operating systems for IBM Z 
and Power Systems hardware. Many of these offerings can be 
delivered entirely or partially through as-a-Service or cloud 
delivery models, while others are delivered as on-premise 
software licenses.
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is 
recognized at a point in time at the inception of the arrangement 
when control transfers to the client, if the software license is 
distinct from the post-contract support offered by the company. 
In limited circumstances, when the software requires continuous 
updates to provide the intended functionality, the software license 
and post-contract support are not distinct and revenue for the 
single performance obligation is recognized over time as the post-
contract support is provided. This is only applicable to certain 
security software perpetual licenses offered by the company. 
Prior to the adoption of the new revenue standard, the company 
recognized revenue for these software licenses at a point in time 
at the inception of the arrangement. This change did not have a 
material impact on the company’s financial statements.
Revenue from post-contract support is recognized over the 
contract term on a straight-line basis because the company is 
providing a service of standing ready to provide support, when-
and-if needed, and is providing unspecified software upgrades 
on a when-and-if available basis over the contract term.
Revenue from software hosting or Software-as-a-Service 
arrangements is recognized either on a straight-line basis or 
on a usage basis as described in the Services section above. In 
software hosting arrangements, the rights provided to the client 
(e.g., ownership of a license, contract termination provisions and 
the feasibility of the client to operate the software) are considered 
in determining whether the arrangement includes a license. In 
arrangements that include a software license, the associated 
revenue is recognized in accordance with the software license 
recognition policy above rather than over time as a service.
Revenue from term license software is recognized at a point in 
time for the committed term of the contract (which is typically one 
month due to client termination rights). However, if the amount 
of consideration to be paid in exchange for the license depends 
on client usage, revenue is recognized when the usage occurs.


===== PAGE 81 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
80
Financing
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct 
financing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis 
using the effective interest method. Operating lease income is 
recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Standalone Selling Price
The company allocates the transaction price to each performance 
obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The 
standalone selling price (SSP) is the price at which the company 
would sell a promised product or service separately to a client. 
In most cases, the company is able to establish SSP based on 
the observable prices of products or services sold separately 
in comparable circumstances to similar clients. The company 
typically establishes a standalone selling price range for its 
products and services which are reassessed on a periodic basis 
or when facts and circumstances change.
In certain instances, the company may not be able to establish 
a SSP range based on observable prices and the company 
estimates SSP. The company estimates SSP by considering 
multiple factors including, but not limited to, overall market 
conditions, including geographic or regional specific factors, 
competitive positioning, competitor actions, internal costs, 
profit objectives and pricing practices. Additionally, in certain 
circumstances, the company may estimate SSP for a product or 
service by applying the residual approach. This approach has 
been most commonly used when certain perpetual software 
licenses are only sold bundled with one year of post-contract 
support and a price has not been established for the software. 
Estimating SSP is a formal process that includes review and 
approval by the company’s management.
Services Costs
Recurring operating costs for services contracts are recognized 
as incurred. For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs 
of external hardware and software accounted for under the 
cost-to-cost measure of progress are deferred and recognized 
based on the labor costs incurred to date (i.e., the measure of 
progress), as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs 
to fulfill the contract as control transfers over time for these 
performance obligations. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs 
incurred in the initial phases of outsourcing contracts and 
other cloud-based services contracts (i.e., setup costs) are 
capitalized when the costs relate directly to the contract, the 
costs generate or enhance resources of the company that will be 
used in satisfying the performance obligation in the future, and 
the costs are expected to be recovered. These costs consist of 
transition and setup costs related to the installation of systems 
and processes and other deferred fulfillment costs, including, 
prepaid assets used in services contracts (i.e., prepaid software 
or prepaid maintenance), and other deferred fulfillment costs 
eligible for capitalization. Capitalized costs are amortized on a 
straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, which 
includes anticipated contract renewals or extensions, consistent 
with the transfer to the client of the services to which the asset 
relates. Additionally, fixed assets associated with these contracts 
are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the 
expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, 
then the depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life 
of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in 
excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in outsourcing 
arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line 
basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of 
benefit. The company performs periodic reviews to assess the 
recoverability of deferred contract transition and setup costs. 
This review is done by comparing the carrying amount of the asset 
to the remaining amount of consideration the company expects 
to receive for the services to which the asset relates, less the 
costs that relate directly to providing those services that have 
not yet been recognized. If the carrying amount is deemed not 
recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized. Refer to note O, 
“Revenue Recognition,” on pages 120 to 122 for the amount of 
deferred costs to fulfill a contract at December 31, 2018.
In situations in which an outsourcing contract is terminated, 
the terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse 
the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, 
unamortized deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets 
utilized in the delivery of services and to pay any additional costs 
incurred by the company to transition the services.
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design 
of licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to 
research, development and engineering expense; costs that 
are incurred to produce the finished product after technological 
feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible 
asset. Capitalized amounts are amortized on a straight-line 
basis over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded 
in software cost within cost of sales. The company performs 
periodic reviews to ensure that unamortized program costs 
remain recoverable from future revenue. Costs to support or 
service licensed programs are charged to software cost within 
cost of sales as incurred.
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to 
purchase or to create and implement internal-use software 
programs, including software coding, installation, testing and 
certain data conversions. Internal-use software programs also 
include software used by the company to deliver Software-as-a-
Service when the client does not receive a license to the software 
and the company has no substantive plans to market the software 
externally. Capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line 
basis over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded 
in selling, general and administrative expense or cost of sales, 
depending on whether the software is used by the company in 
revenue generating transactions.


===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
81
Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the initial phases 
of arrangements in which IBM provides Software-as-a-Service 
are deferred and amortized over the expected period of benefit, 
which includes anticipated contract renewals or extensions, 
consistent with the policy described for Services Costs. Recurring 
operating costs in these contracts are recognized as incurred. 
Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract 
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract (e.g., sales 
commissions) are capitalized and amortized on a straight-
line basis over the expected customer relationship period if 
the company expects to recover those costs. The company 
previously expensed these costs as incurred. The expected 
customer relationship period is determined based on the average 
customer relationship period, including expected renewals, for 
each offering type and ranges from three to six years. Expected 
renewal periods are only included in the expected customer 
relationship period if commission amounts paid upon renewal 
are not commensurate with amounts paid on the initial contract. 
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract include only those 
costs the company incurs to obtain a contract that it would not 
have incurred if the contract had not been obtained. The company 
has determined that certain commission programs meet the 
requirements to be capitalized. Some commission programs are 
not subject to capitalization as the commission expense is paid 
and recognized as the related revenue is recognized. Additionally, 
as a practical expedient, the company expenses costs to obtain a 
contract as incurred if the amortization period would have been 
a year or less. These costs are included in selling, general and 
administrative expenses.
Product Warranties 
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that 
generally range up to three years, with the majority being either 
one or three years. Estimated costs for standard warranty 
terms are recognized when revenue is recorded for the related 
product. The company estimates its warranty costs standard 
to the product based on historical warranty claim experience 
and estimates of future spending, and applies this estimate to 
the revenue stream for products under warranty. Estimated 
future costs for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in 
the current period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty 
liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the 
remaining obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over 
the balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when 
actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs 
from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including 
extended warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred.
Revenue from extended warranty contracts is initially recorded 
as deferred income and subsequently recognized on a straight-
line basis over the delivery period because the company is 
providing a service of standing ready to provide services over 
such term. Changes in deferred income for extended warranty 
contracts, and in the warranty liability for standard warranties, 
which are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities 
and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position, are presented in the following tables:
Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
2018
2017
Balance at January 1
$ 152
$ 156
Current period accruals
121
172
Accrual adjustments to reflect experience
(32)
(10)
Charges incurred
(123)
(165)
Balance at December 31
$ 118
$ 152
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
($ in millions)
2018
2017
Balance at January 1
$ 566
$ 531
Revenue deferred for new extended  
warranty contracts
220
267
Amortization of deferred revenue
(240)
(260)
Other*
(13)
28
Balance at December 31
$ 533
$ 566
Current portion
$ 271
$ 277
Noncurrent portion
$ 262
$ 289
*	 Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred 
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Expense and Other Income
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged 
to income as incurred, except for certain sales commissions, 
which are capitalized and amortized as of January 1, 2018. For 
further information regarding capitalizing sales commissions, see 
“Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract” above. Expenses 
of promoting and selling products and services are classified as 
selling expense and, in addition to sales commissions, include 
such items as compensation, advertising and travel. General and 
administrative expense includes such items as compensation, 
legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance and 
office rental. In addition, general and administrative expense 
includes other operating items such as an allowance for credit 
losses, workforce rebalancing charges for contractually obligated 
payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course of 
business, acquisition costs related to business combinations, 
amortization of certain intangible assets and environmental 
remediation costs.


===== PAGE 83 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
82
Advertising and Promotional Expense
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as 
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors 
are recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in 
the period in which the related advertising and promotional 
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, which 
includes media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,466 
million, $1,445 million and $1,327 million in 2018, 2017 and 
2016, respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are 
expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to 
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has 
been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its 
intellectual property (IP) including internally developed 
patents, trade secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP 
transactions to third parties are licensing/royalty-based and 
others are transaction-based sales/other transfers. Income 
from licensing arrangements is recognized at the inception of the 
license term if the nature of the company’s promise is to provide a 
right to use the company’s intellectual property as it exists at that 
point in time (i.e., the license is functional intellectual property) 
and control has transferred to the client. If the nature of the 
company’s promise is to provide a right to access the company’s 
intellectual property throughout the license period (i.e., the 
license is symbolic intellectual property), such as a trademark 
license, income is recognized over time. Licensing arrangements 
include IP partnerships whereby a business partner licenses 
source code from the company and becomes responsible for 
developing, maintaining and enhancing the product. The company 
retains its customers and go-to-market capability and any royalty 
cost due to the partner is recognized in cost of sales. The IP 
partner has the rights to market the product and its derivative 
works under its own brand and remits royalty to the company on 
those sales, which are recorded as royalty-based fees. Income 
from royalty-based fee arrangements is recognized at the later 
of when the subsequent sale or usage occurs or the performance 
obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated 
has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). Depending on the 
nature of the transaction, an IP partnership would be accounted 
for as a divestiture if the company concludes the transaction 
meets the definition of a business. The company also enters 
into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and income from 
these arrangements is recognized when control transfers to the 
customer. In addition, the company earns income from certain 
custom development projects with strategic technology partners 
and specific clients. The company records the income from these 
projects over time as the company satisfies the performance 
obligation if the fee is nonrefundable and is not dependent upon 
the ultimate success of the project.
Other (Income) and Expense
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other 
than from Global Financing external transactions), gains and 
losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from 
securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain 
real estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and 
losses, gains and losses from the sale of businesses, other than 
reported as discontinued operations, and amounts related to 
accretion of asset retirement obligations. Other (income) and 
expense also includes certain components of retirement-related 
costs, including interest costs, expected return on plan assets, 
amortization of prior service costs (credits), curtailments and 
settlements and other net periodic pension/postretirement 
benefit costs. 
Business Combinations and  
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the 
acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets 
acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest 
in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. 
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair 
value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifiable 
intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate goodwill 
are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and 
the company and the acquired assembled workforce, neither 
of which qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset. 
Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable 
reporting units based on expected revenues. Identifiable 
intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful 
lives. Amortization of completed technology is recorded in cost, 
and amortization of all other intangible assets is recorded in 
SG&A expense. Acquisition-related costs, including advisory, 
legal, accounting, valuation and other costs, are expensed in the 
periods in which the costs are incurred. The results of operations 
of acquired businesses are included in the Consolidated Financial 
Statements from the acquisition date.
Impairment
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived 
intangible assets, are tested for impairment whenever events 
or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount 
may not be recoverable. The impairment test is based on 
undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, the asset is written 
down to fair value based on either discounted cash flows or 
appraised values. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible 
assets are tested at least annually, in the fourth quarter, for 
impairment and whenever changes in circumstances indicate an 
impairment may exist. The goodwill impairment test is performed 
by reporting unit, which is an operating segment, a component 
or multiple components of an operating segment. A component 
meets the definition of a reporting unit if it is one level below an 
operating segment, is considered to be a business with discrete 
financial information available and is regularly reviewed by 
segment management. Components are aggregated as a single 
reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics.


===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
83
Depreciation and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated 
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. 
The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as 
follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 
years; land improvements, 20 years; production, engineering, 
office and other equipment, 2 to 20 years; and information 
technology equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold improvements 
are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or 
the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years.
As noted on page 80 within “Software Costs,” capitalized software 
costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging 
up to 3 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over periods 
between 1 and 7 years.
Environmental
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are 
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup 
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will 
incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated, 
the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental 
liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental 
liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for 
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations 
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets. These 
liabilities are initially recorded at fair value and the related 
asset retirement costs are capitalized by increasing the 
carrying amount of the related assets by the same amount as 
the liability. Asset retirement costs are subsequently depreciated 
over the useful lives of the related assets. Subsequent to initial 
recognition, the company records period-to-period changes in 
the ARO liability resulting from the passage of time in interest 
expense and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the 
original expected cash flows to the related assets.
Defined Benefit Pension and  
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related 
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the 
difference between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit 
obligation at December 31, the measurement date. For defined 
benefit pension plans, the benefit obligation is the projected 
benefit obligation (PBO), which represents the actuarial present 
value of benefits expected to be paid upon retirement based 
on employee services already rendered and estimated future 
compensation levels. For the nonpension postretirement benefit 
plans, the benefit obligation is the accumulated postretirement 
benefit obligation (APBO), which represents the actuarial present 
value of postretirement benefits attributed to employee services 
already rendered. The fair value of plan assets represents the 
current market value of assets held in an irrevocable trust fund, 
held for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by the 
trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets 
exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as 
a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, 
with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets, 
are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension 
postretirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension post-
retirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present 
value of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the 
fair value of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. 
This obligation is recorded in compensation and benefits in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit 
cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings and includes service cost, interest cost, expected 
return on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 
and (gains)/losses previously recognized as a component of 
OCI and amortization of the net transition asset remaining 
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). 
Service cost represents the actuarial present value of participant 
benefits earned in the current year. Interest cost represents 
the time value of money cost associated with the passage of 
time. Certain events, such as changes in the employee base, 
plan amendments and changes in actuarial assumptions, result 
in a change in the benefit obligation and the corresponding 
change in OCI. The result of these events is amortized as a 
component of net periodic cost/(income) over the service lives 
or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, 
provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are based upon 
the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets. The service 
cost component of net benefit cost is recorded in Cost, SG&A 
and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings (unless 
eligible for capitalization) based on the employees’ respective 
functions. The other components of net benefit cost are 
presented separately from service cost within other (income) 
and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Refer 
to note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 89 to 91, for additional 
information on the presentation change relating to pension costs 
beginning on January 1, 2018.
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are not 
recognized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in 
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings as they arise, but 
are recognized as a component of OCI in the Consolidated 
Statement of Comprehensive Income. Those (gains)/losses 
and prior service costs/(credits) are subsequently recognized 
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) pursuant to the 
recognition and amortization provisions of applicable accounting 
guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result of differences between 
actual experience and assumptions or as a result of changes in 
actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) represent the 
cost of benefit changes attributable to prior service granted in 
plan amendments.


===== PAGE 85 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
84
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved 
by the company’s management. These valuations reflect the 
terms of the plans and use participant-specific information such 
as compensation, age and years of service, as well as certain 
assumptions, including estimates of discount rates, expected 
return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest 
crediting rates and mortality rates.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is 
recorded when the employee renders service to the company. 
The charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ 
respective functions.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
based awards granted to employees. The company measures 
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on 
the estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost 
on a straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the 
employee requisite service period. The company grants its 
employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention 
Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Performance Share Units 
(PSUs) and periodically grants stock options. RSUs are stock 
awards granted to employees that entitle the holder to shares 
of common stock as the award vests, typically over a one- to 
five-year period. The fair value of the awards is determined and 
fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price, 
adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. The company 
estimates the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes 
valuation model. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded in 
Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
based on the employees’ respective functions.
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result 
in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on 
the amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory 
tax rate in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. 
The differences between the deferred tax assets recognized 
for financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction 
reported on the income tax return are recorded as a benefit or 
expense to the provision for income taxes in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income 
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary 
differences between asset and liability amounts that are 
recognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that 
are recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes 
are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation 
allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the 
amount that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing 
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all 
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating 
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility 
of ongoing tax planning strategies. When the company changes 
its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that 
can be realized, the valuation allowance is adjusted with a 
corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in 
which such determination is made.
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the 
company’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, 
the company believes that certain positions may not be fully 
sustained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax 
positions are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is 
greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. 
The current portion of tax liabilities is included in taxes and the 
noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities 
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. To the 
extent that new information becomes available which causes 
the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of 
existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact 
income tax expense in the period in which such determination 
is made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued 
liabilities for potential tax assessments are included in income 
tax expense. 
The U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act introduced GILTI, which subjects 
a U.S. shareholder to current tax on income earned by certain 
foreign subsidiaries. The Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB) allows companies to either (1) recognize deferred taxes 
for temporary differences that are expected to reverse as GILTI in 
future years (deferred method) or (2) account for taxes on GILTI 
as period costs in the year the tax is incurred (period method). 
The company elected the deferred method and in order to record 
the initial deferred taxes for GILTI, the company estimated the 
impact of foreign temporary differences on GILTI in future years. 
This included consideration of statutory limitation impacts on 
the GILTI calculation. 
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local 
functional currency are translated to U.S. dollars at year-end 
exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded in OCI. 
Income and expense items are translated at weighted-average 
rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other 
non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries 
and branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the 
approximate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired 
the assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated 
in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end 
exchange rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in other 
(income) and expense. Income and expense items are translated at 
the weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. 
These translation gains and losses are included in net income for 
the period in which exchange rates change.


===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
85
Derivative Financial Instruments
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid 
expenses and other current assets, investments and sundry 
assets, other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. 
Classification of each derivative as current or noncurrent is 
based upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than 
or greater than 12 months. To qualify for hedge accounting, 
the company requires that the instruments be effective in 
reducing the risk exposure that they are designated to hedge. 
For instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge designation criteria 
also require that it be probable that the underlying transaction 
will occur. Instruments that meet established accounting criteria 
are formally designated as hedges. These criteria demonstrate 
that the derivative is expected to be highly effective at offsetting 
changes in fair value or cash flows of the underlying exposure 
both at inception of the hedging relationship and on an ongoing 
basis. The method of assessing hedge effectiveness and 
measuring hedge results is formally documented at hedge 
inception. The company assesses hedge effectiveness and 
measures hedge results at least quarterly throughout the 
designated hedge period.
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company 
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of 
a recognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized 
firm commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate 
or foreign currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash 
flows of a forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received 
or paid related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash 
flow hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); 
or (3) a hedge of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) 
in a foreign operation. In addition, the company may enter into 
derivative contracts that economically hedge certain of its risks, 
even though hedge accounting does not apply or the company 
elects not to apply hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists 
a natural hedging relationship in which changes in the fair value 
of the derivative, which are recognized currently in net income, 
act as an economic offset to changes in the fair value of the 
underlying hedged item(s).
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a 
fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of 
the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each 
period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments 
are recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of 
financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges 
of currency risk associated with recorded financial assets or 
liabilities, derivative fair value adjustments are recognized in 
other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is 
designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable 
taxes, in OCI, in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive 
Income. When net income is affected by the variability of the 
underlying cash flow, the applicable offsetting amount of the gain 
or loss from the derivative that is deferred in AOCI is released 
to net income and reported in interest expense, cost, SG&A 
expense or other (income) and expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings based on the nature of the underlying 
cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net investment hedging 
derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot basis. Changes in the 
fair value of highly effective net investment hedging derivatives 
and other non-derivative financial instruments designated as net 
investment hedges are recorded as foreign currency translation 
adjustments in AOCI. Changes in the fair value of the portion of a 
net investment hedging derivative excluded from the assessment 
of effectiveness are recorded in interest expense and cost of 
financing. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge 
ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are 
included in net income each period until the instrument matures. 
When the derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset 
or liability is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except 
as required under other relevant accounting standards.
Derivatives that are not designated as hedges are recorded in 
earnings for each period and are primarily reported in other 
(income) and expense. When a cash flow hedging relationship is 
discontinued, the net gain or loss in AOCI must generally remain 
in AOCI until the item that was hedged affects earnings. However, 
when it is probable that a forecasted transaction will not occur 
by the end of the originally specified time period or within an 
additional two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss in 
AOCI must be reclassified into earnings immediately.
The company reports cash flows arising from derivative financial 
instruments designated as fair value or cash flow hedges 
consistent with the classification of cash flows from the underlying 
hedged items that these derivatives are hedging. Accordingly, the 
cash flows associated with derivatives designated as fair value 
or cash flow hedges are classified in cash flows from operating 
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Cash 
flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges and 
derivatives that do not qualify as hedges are reported in cash 
flows from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of 
Cash Flows. For currency swaps designated as hedges of foreign 
currency denominated debt (included in the company’s debt 
risk management program as addressed in note D, “Financial 
Instruments,” on pages 95 to 102), cash flows directly associated 
with the settlement of the principal element of these swaps are 
reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from financing 
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Financial Instruments
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the 
company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are 
based on market conditions and risks existing at each balance 
sheet date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 95 to 
102 for further information. All methods of assessing fair value 
result in a general approximation of value, and such value may 
never actually be realized.


===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
86
Fair Value Measurement 
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be 
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly 
transaction between market participants at the measurement 
date. Under this guidance, the company is required to classify 
certain assets and liabilities based on the following fair value 
hierarchy:
•	 Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for 
identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the 
measurement date;
•	 Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within 
Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either 
directly or indirectly; and
•	 Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such 
data is available without undue cost and effort.
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market 
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies 
such items as Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair 
value is based upon internally developed models that use current 
market-based or independently sourced market parameters such 
as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using internally 
generated models are classified according to the lowest level input 
or value driver that is significant to the valuation.
The determination of fair value considers various factors 
including interest rate yield curves and time value underlying 
the financial instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, 
the company uses a discounted cash flow analysis using discount 
rates commensurate with the duration of the instrument.
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the 
company considers certain market valuation adjustments to the 
“base valuations” calculated using the methodologies described 
below for several parameters that market participants would 
consider in determining fair value:
•	 Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial 
instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a 
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market 
to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
•	 Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s 
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair 
value. The methodology is consistent with that applied in 
developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but 
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed in 
the credit default swap market.
As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a 
discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs 
such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and 
forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs 
relate to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets 
which are available for the full term of the derivative.
Certain assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring 
basis can be subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. 
These assets include available-for-sale debt securities that are 
deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of 
an other-than-temporary impairment of a debt security, fair value 
is measured using a model described above.
Certain non-financial assets such as property, plant and 
equipment, land, goodwill and intangible assets are also subject 
to nonrecurring fair value measurements if they are deemed to be 
impaired. The impairment models used for non-financial assets 
depend on the type of asset. There were no material impairments 
of non-financial assets for the years ended December 31, 2018, 
2017 and 2016.
Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible 
financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments 
at fair value, on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are 
otherwise not permitted to be accounted for at fair value under 
other accounting standards. This election is irrevocable. The 
company has not applied the fair value option to any eligible 
assets or liabilities.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or 
less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.
Marketable Securities
Effective January 1, 2018, with the adoption of the new FASB 
guidance on recognition, measurement, presentation and 
disclosure of financial instruments, the company measures equity 
investments at fair value with changes recognized in net income.
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities 
that are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the 
balance sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not 
expected to be realized in cash within one year and alliance 
equity securities are included in investments and sundry assets. 
Debt securities are considered available for sale and are reported 
at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable 
taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and losses for available-for-sale 
debt securities are included in other (income) and expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and losses 
are calculated based on the specific identification method.


===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
87
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in 
market value has occurred, the company considers the duration 
that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below 
its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the 
issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the company’s 
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an 
anticipated recovery in fair value. Other-than-temporary declines 
in fair value from amortized cost for available-for-sale debt 
securities that the company intends to sell or would more likely 
than not be required to sell before the expected recovery of the 
amortized cost basis are charged to other (income) and expense 
in the period in which the loss occurs. For debt securities that 
the company has no intent to sell and believes that it more likely 
than not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, only the 
credit loss component of the impairment is recognized in other 
(income) and expense, while the remaining loss is recognized in 
OCI. The credit loss component recognized in other (income) and 
expense is identified as the amount of the principal cash flows 
not expected to be received over the remaining term of the debt 
security as projected using the company’s cash flow projections. 
Inventories
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated 
at the lower of average cost or net realizable value. Cash flows 
related to the sale of inventories are reflected in net cash 
provided by operating activities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Cash Flows.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of 
a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable 
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receivables 
is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
Contract Assets and Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
As of January 1, 2018, the company classifies the right to 
consideration in exchange for products or services transferred 
to a client as either a receivable or a contract asset. A receivable 
is a right to consideration that is unconditional as compared 
to a contract asset which is a right to consideration that is 
conditional upon factors other than the passage of time. The 
majority of the company’s contract assets represent unbilled 
amounts related to design and build services contracts when 
the cost-to-cost method of revenue recognition is utilized, 
revenue recognized exceeds the amount billed to the client, and 
the right to consideration is subject to milestone completion or 
client acceptance. Contract assets are generally classified as 
current and are recorded on a net basis with deferred income 
(i.e., contract liabilities) at the contract level. At December 31, 
2018 and January 1, 2018 contract assets of $470 million and 
$557 million, respectively, are included in prepaid expenses and 
other current assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. At December 31, 2017, these assets were classified 
as notes and accounts receivable—trade in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position.
An allowance for contract assets, if needed, and uncollectible 
trade receivables is estimated based on a combination of write-off 
history, aging analysis and any specific, known troubled accounts.
Factored Receivables
The company enters into various factoring agreements with 
third-party financial institutions to sell its receivables (includes 
notes and accounts receivable—trade, financing receivables and 
other accounts receivables) under nonrecourse agreements. 
Accounts receivable sales arrangements are utilized in the 
normal course of business as part of the company’s cash and 
liquidity management. Facilities in the U.S., Canada and several 
countries in Europe enable the company to sell certain accounts 
receivable, without recourse, to third parties in order to manage 
credit, collection, concentration and currency risk.
These transactions are accounted for as a reduction in receivables 
and are considered sold when: (1) they are transferred beyond the 
reach of the company and its creditors; (2) the purchaser has the 
right to pledge or exchange the receivables; and (3) the company 
has surrendered control over the transferred receivables. 
The proceeds from these arrangements are reflected as cash 
provided by operating activities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Cash Flows.
The gross amounts factored (the gross proceeds) under these 
programs (primarily relating to notes and accounts receivable—
trade) for the year ended December 31, 2018 were $2.2 billion 
compared to $1.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 
2017. Within the accounts receivables sold and derecognized 
from the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, $0.9 
billion and $0.7 billion remained uncollected from customers at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The fees and the net 
gains and losses associated with the transfer of receivables were 
not material for any of the periods presented.
Financing Receivables
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing 
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance 
with lease accounting standards. Loan receivables, including 
installment payment plans, which are generally unsecured, are 
primarily for software and services. Loans are financial assets 
which are recorded at amortized cost, which approximates fair 
value. Commercial financing receivables are carried at amortized 
cost, which approximates fair value. These receivables are for 
working capital financing to suppliers, distributors and resellers of 
IBM and OEM IT products and services. The company determines 
its allowances for credit losses on financing receivables based on 
two portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan receivables. 
The company further segments the portfolio into three classes: 
Americas, Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) and Asia Pacific.


===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
88
When calculating the allowances, the company considers 
its ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased 
equipment and by considering the current fair market value 
of any other collateral. The value of the equipment is the net 
realizable value. The allowance for credit losses for capital 
leases, installment payment plan receivables and customer loans 
includes an assessment of the entire balance of the capital lease 
or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that 
the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which 
are applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows:
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing 
receivables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review 
primarily consists of an analysis based upon current information 
available about the client, such as financial statements, news 
reports, published credit ratings, current market-implied credit 
analysis, as well as the current economic environment, collateral 
net of repossession cost and prior collection history. For loans 
that are collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the 
fair value of the collateral when foreclosure is probable. Using 
this information, the company determines the expected cash flow 
for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential loss 
and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss 
is probable, the company records a specific reserve.
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated 
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different 
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been individually 
evaluated and specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based 
upon credit rating, probability of default, term, characteristics 
(lease/loan) and loss history. Factors that could result in actual 
receivable losses that are materially different from the estimated 
reserve include significant changes in the economy, or a sudden 
change in the economic health of a significant client in the 
company’s receivables portfolio.
Other Credit-Related Policies
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when 
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from 
the original billing date.
Non-Accrual—Non-accrual assets include those receivables 
(impaired loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves 
and other accounts for which it is likely that the company will 
be unable to collect all amounts due according to original terms 
of the lease or loan agreement. Interest income recognition 
is discontinued on these receivables. Cash collections are 
first applied as a reduction to principal outstanding. Any 
cash received in excess of principal payments outstanding is 
recognized as interest income. Receivables may be removed 
from non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in 
client circumstances, such as a sustained history of payments.
Impaired Loans—The company evaluates all financing receivables 
considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment on a quarterly 
basis. The company considers any receivable with an individually 
evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of 
impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status as 
appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services 
and are unsecured. These receivables are subjected to credit 
analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, when appropriate, 
actions are taken to mitigate risks in these agreements which 
include covenants to protect against credit deterioration during 
the life of the obligation.
Write-Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance 
in the period in which the receivable is deemed uncollectible. 
Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. 
Write-offs of receivables and associated reserves occur to 
the extent that the customer is no longer in operation and/or, 
there is no reasonable expectation of additional collections 
or repossession. The company’s assessments factor in the 
history of collections and write-offs in specific countries and 
across the portfolio.
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at the 
inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets at 
the end of the lease term. The company periodically reassesses 
the realizable value of its lease residual values. Any anticipated 
increases in specific future residual values are not recognized 
before realization through remarketing efforts. Anticipated 
decreases in specific future residual values that are considered 
to be other-than-temporary are recognized immediately upon 
identification and are recorded as an adjustment to the residual 
value estimate. For sales-type and direct financing leases, this 
reduction lowers the recorded net investment and is recognized 
as a loss charged to financing income in the period in which 
the estimate is changed, as well as an adjustment to unearned 
income to reduce future-period financing income.
Common Stock
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock 
as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. 
Treasury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When 
treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded 
using a weighted-average basis. 
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class 
method. The two-class method determines EPS for each class of 
common stock and participating securities according to dividends 
and dividend equivalents and their respective participation 
rights in undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock 
is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average 
number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted 
EPS of common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-
average number of shares of common stock plus the effect of 
dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period 
using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common 
shares include outstanding stock awards, convertible notes and 
stock options. 


===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
89
NOTE B. ACCOUNTING CHANGES
New Standards to be Implemented
In August 2018, the FASB issued guidance on a customer’s 
accounting for implementation costs incurred in cloud-computing 
arrangements that are hosted by a vendor. Certain types of 
implementation costs should be capitalized and amortized over 
the term of the hosting arrangement. The guidance is effective 
January 1, 2020 and early adoption is permitted. The company 
adopted the guidance on January 1, 2019 on a prospective basis. 
The guidance is not expected to have a material impact in the 
consolidated financial results.
In August 2018, the FASB issued guidance which changed the 
disclosure requirements for fair value measurements and defined 
benefit plans. The guidance is effective for each of the topics 
on January 1, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively, with 
early adoption of certain provisions permitted. As a result, the 
company has removed Level 1/Level 2 transfer disclosures 
in accordance with the fair value guidance. The company is 
evaluating the adoption date for the remaining changes. As the 
guidance is a change to disclosures only, the company does not 
expect the guidance to have a material impact in the consolidated 
financial results.
In January 2017, the FASB issued guidance that simplifies the 
goodwill impairment test by removing Step 2. The guidance 
also changes the requirements for reporting units with zero or 
negative carrying amounts and requires additional disclosures 
for these reporting units. The guidance is effective January 1, 
2020 and early adoption is permitted. The company expects to 
adopt the guidance on a prospective basis on the effective date. 
The company is evaluating the impact of the guidance.
In June 2016, with amendments in 2018, the FASB issued 
guidance for credit impairment based on an expected loss 
model rather than an incurred loss model. The guidance requires 
the consideration of all available relevant information when 
estimating expected credit losses, including past events, current 
conditions and forecasts and their implications for expected 
credit losses. A cross-functional team has been established 
that is evaluating the financial instruments portfolio and the 
system, process and policy change requirements. The new 
guidance expands the scope of financial instruments subject 
to impairment, including off-balance sheet commitments and 
residual value. The guidance is effective January 1, 2020 with 
one-year early adoption permitted. The company will adopt the 
guidance as of the effective date and is continuing to evaluate 
the impact.
The FASB issued guidance in February 2016, with amendments 
in 2018, which changes the accounting for leases. The guidance 
requires lessees to recognize right-of-use assets and lease 
liabilities for most leases in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position. The guidance makes some changes to lessor 
accounting, including elimination of the use of third-party 
residual value guarantee insurance in the lease classification 
test, and overall aligns with the new revenue recognition 
guidance. The guidance also requires qualitative and quantitative 
disclosures to assess the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash 
flows arising from leases. The guidance was effective January 1, 
2019 and early adoption was permitted. The company adopted 
the guidance on the effective date using the transition option 
whereby prior comparative periods will not be retrospectively 
presented in the consolidated financial statements. The company 
elected the package of practical expedients not to reassess 
prior conclusions related to contracts containing leases, lease 
classification and initial direct costs and the lessee practical 
expedient to combine lease and nonlease components for 
all asset classes. The company made a policy election to not 
recognize right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for short-term 
leases for all asset classes.
A cross-functional implementation team evaluated the lease 
portfolio and implemented system, process, control and policy 
changes. The company also gathered lease data in order to 
comply with the requirements in the guidance, including new 
disclosures that will be added to the Notes to the Consolidated 
Financial Statements beginning in the first quarter of 2019. The 
guidance had a material impact on the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position as of the effective date. As a lessee, the 
company’s undiscounted operating lease commitments were 
$5.6 billion at December 31, 2018, which is expected to 
approximate the January 1, 2019 balance of operating lease 
liabilities, which will be discounted by the company’s incremental 
borrowing rate. The transition adjustment recognized in retained 
earnings at the effective date is not expected to be material. 
From a lessor perspective, due to changes in lease termination 
guidance, when equipment is returned to the company prior 
to the end of the lease term, the carrying amounts of lease 
receivables, which remain outstanding relating to that equipment 
and are still expected to be collected, will be reclassified to loan 
receivables. The amount that would have been reclassified 
from lease receivables to loan receivables in 2018, under the 
application of this new guidance, would have been approximately 
$263 million. Additionally, the company does not expect the 
removal of third-party residual value guarantee insurance in 
the lease classification test to have a material impact on the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Standards Implemented
In February 2018, the FASB issued guidance that allows entities 
to elect an option to reclassify the stranded tax effects related 
to the application of U.S. tax reform from AOCI to retained 
earnings. The guidance was effective January 1, 2019 with 
early adoption permitted, and can be applied either in the 
period of adoption or retrospectively to all applicable periods. 
The company adopted the guidance effective January 1, 2018, 
and elected not to reclassify prior periods. In accordance with its 
accounting policy, the company releases income tax effects from 
AOCI once the reason the tax effects were established ceases 
to exist (e.g., when available-for-sale debt securities are sold 
or if a pension plan is liquidated). This guidance allows for the 
reclassification of stranded tax effects as a result of the change 
in tax rates from U.S. tax reform to be recorded upon adoption of 
the guidance rather than at the actual cessation date. At adoption 
on January 1, 2018, $2,420 million was reclassified from AOCI 
to retained earnings, primarily comprised of amounts relating to 
retirement-related benefit plans.


===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
90
In August 2017, the FASB issued guidance to simplify the 
application of hedge accounting in certain areas, better portray 
the economic results of an entity’s risk management activities 
in its financial statements and make targeted improvements to 
presentation and disclosure requirements. The guidance was 
effective January 1, 2019 with early adoption permitted. The 
company adopted the guidance as of January 1, 2018, and it did 
not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
In March 2017, the FASB issued guidance that impacts the 
presentation of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit 
costs (net benefit cost). Under the guidance, the service cost 
component of net benefit cost continues to be presented within 
cost, SG&A expense and RD&E expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings, unless eligible for capitalization. The 
other components of net benefit cost are presented separately 
from service cost within other (income) and expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The guidance was effective 
January 1, 2018 with early adoption permitted. The company 
adopted the guidance as of the effective date. The guidance is 
primarily a change in financial statement presentation and did 
not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results. 
This presentation change was applied retrospectively upon 
adoption. For the year ended December 31, 2017, $717 million, 
$427 million and $197 million was recast from total cost, SG&A 
expense and RD&E expense, respectively, into other (income) and 
expense. For the year ended December 31, 2016, $222 million, 
$126 million and $25 million was recast from total cost, SG&A 
expense and RD&E expense, respectively, into other (income) 
and expense. Refer to note T, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for 
additional information.
In January 2016, the FASB issued guidance which addresses 
aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and 
disclosure of financial instruments. The guidance was effective 
January 1, 2018 and early adoption was not permitted except 
for limited provisions. The company adopted the guidance on the 
effective date. Certain equity investments are now measured at 
fair value with changes recognized in net income. The amendment 
also simplified the impairment test of equity investments that 
lack readily determinable fair value. The guidance did not have a 
material impact in the consolidated financial results.
The FASB issued guidance on the recognition of revenue from 
contracts with customers in May 2014 with amendments in 2015 
and 2016. Revenue recognition depicts the transfer of promised 
goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects 
the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled 
in exchange for those goods or services. The guidance also 
requires specific disclosures relating to revenue recognition. The 
company adopted the guidance effective January 1, 2018 using 
the modified retrospective transition method. At adoption, $557 
million was reclassified from notes and accounts receivable—
trade and deferred income—current to prepaid expenses and 
other current assets to establish the opening balance for net 
contract assets. In-scope sales commission costs previously 
recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings were 
capitalized in deferred costs, in accordance with the transition 
guidance, in the amount of $737 million. Deferred income of 
$29 million was recorded for certain software licenses that will 
be recognized over time versus at point in time under previous 
guidance. Additionally, net deferred taxes were reduced by $184 
million in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, 
resulting in a cumulative-effect net increase to retained earnings 
of $524 million. In the fourth quarter of 2018, the company 
recognized an additional impact to net deferred taxes and 
retained earnings of $56 million, resulting in a total net increase 
to retained earnings of $580 million. The decrease to net deferred 
taxes was the result of the company’s election to include GILTI in 
measuring deferred taxes. For additional information regarding 
GILTI, refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.” The 
revenue guidance did not have a material impact in the company’s 
consolidated financial results for the year ended December 31, 
2018. The company expects revenue recognition for its broad 
portfolio of hardware, software and services offerings to remain 
largely unchanged. Refer to note O, “Revenue Recognition,” for 
additional information, including further discussion on the impact 
of adoption.
In January 2017, the FASB issued guidance which clarified 
the definition of a business. The guidance provided a more 
robust framework to use in determining when a set of assets 
and activities acquired or sold is a business. The guidance was 
effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption was permitted. 
The company adopted the guidance effective January 1, 
2017, and it did not have a material impact in the consolidated 
financial results. 
In October 2016, the FASB issued guidance which requires an 
entity to recognize the income tax consequences of intra-entity 
transfers of assets, other than inventory, at the time of transfer. 
Assets within the scope of the guidance include intellectual 
property and property, plant and equipment. The guidance was 
effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption was permitted. 
The company adopted the guidance on January 1, 2017 using 
the required modified retrospective method. At adoption, $95 
million and $47 million were reclassified from investments and 
sundry assets and prepaid expenses and other current assets, 
respectively, into retained earnings. Additionally, net deferred 
taxes of $244 million were established in deferred taxes in 
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, resulting in 
a cumulative-effect net increase to retained earnings of $102 
million. In January 2017, the company had one transaction that 
generated a $582 million benefit to income tax expense, income 
from continuing operations and net income and a benefit to both 
basic and diluted earnings per share of $0.62 per share for the 
year ended December 31, 2017. No transactions impacted the 
consolidated financial results for the year ended December 31, 
2018. The ongoing impact of this guidance will be dependent on 
any transaction that is within its scope.


===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
91
In March 2016, the FASB issued guidance which changed the 
accounting for share-based payment transactions, including 
the income tax consequences, classification of awards as 
either equity or liabilities and classification in the Consolidated 
Statement of Cash Flows. The guidance was effective and 
adopted by the company on January 1, 2017, and it did not have 
a material impact in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. The ongoing impact of the guidance could result 
in increased volatility in the provision for income taxes and 
earnings per share in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings, 
depending on the company’s share price at exercise or vesting 
of share-based awards compared to grant date, however these 
impacts are not expected to be material. These impacts are 
recorded on a prospective basis. The company continues to 
estimate forfeitures in conjunction with measuring stock-based 
compensation cost. The guidance also requires cash payments 
on behalf of employees for shares directly withheld for taxes to be 
presented as financing outflows in the Consolidated Statement 
of Cash Flows. The FASB also issued guidance in May 2017 and 
June 2018, which relates to the accounting for modifications of 
share-based payment awards and accounting for share-based 
payments issued to non-employees, respectively. The company 
adopted the guidance for modifications in the second quarter of 
2017, and guidance for non-employees’ payments in the second 
quarter of 2018. The guidance had no impact in the consolidated 
financial results.
NOTE C. ACQUISITIONS/DIVESTITURES
Acquisitions
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in 
the tables in this note, was paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions 
are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of 
acquired cash and cash equivalents.
2018
In 2018, the company completed two acquisitions at an 
aggregate cost of $49 million. These acquisitions were for 100 
percent of the acquired businesses.
The Cognitive Solutions segment completed the acquisition of 
one privately held business in the second quarter, Armanta, Inc. 
(Armanta). The GBS segment completed the acquisition of one 
privately held business in the second quarter, Oniqua Holdings 
Pty Ltd. (Oniqua).
Each acquisition is expected to enhance the company’s portfolio 
of product and services capabilities. Armanta is a provider of 
aggregation and analytics software to financial institutions, 
enabling data aggregation across multiple systems in near real-
time speed, enhancing decision-making and improving regulatory 
compliance. Oniqua is a global innovator in maintenance-
repair-operate inventory optimization solutions and services for 
asset-intensive industries.
The acquisitions were accounted for as business combinations 
using the acquisition method, and accordingly, the identifiable 
assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling 
interest in the acquired entity were recorded at their estimated 
fair values at the date of acquisition. The acquisitions did not 
have a material impact in the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
The primary items that generated the goodwill are the value of 
the synergies between the acquired businesses and IBM and the 
acquired assembled workforce, neither of which qualify as an 
amortizable intangible asset.
On October 28, 2018, the company announced its intent to 
acquire all of the outstanding shares of Red Hat, Inc. (Red Hat). 
The combination of Red Hat’s vast portfolio of open-source 
technologies, innovative cloud development platform and 
developer community, combined with IBM’s innovative hybrid 
cloud technology, industry expertise, and commitment to data, 
trust and security, will deliver the hybrid cloud capabilities 
required to address the next chapter of cloud implementations. 
Under the terms of the definitive agreement, Red Hat shareholders 
will receive $190 per share in cash, representing a total enterprise 
value of approximately $34 billion. On January 16, 2019, Red 
Hat stockholders voted to approve the merger with IBM. The 
transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including 
regulatory reviews and is expected to close in the second half 
of 2019. The company intends to fund the transaction through a 
combination of cash and debt. Refer to note J, “Borrowings,” for 
additional details on the bridge loan credit facility that IBM has 
entered into in support of this transaction. 


===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
92
2017
In 2017, the company completed five acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $134 million. All of these acquisitions were for 100 
percent of the acquired businesses.
The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms segment completed 
acquisitions of three businesses: in the first quarter, Agile 3 
Solutions, LLC (Agile 3 Solutions), a privately held business; 
in the third quarter, the cloud and managed hosting services 
business from a large U.S. telecommunications company, and 
Cloudigo Ltd. (Cloudigo), a privately held business. The Cognitive 
Solutions segment completed the acquisition of one privately 
held business: in the second quarter, XCC Web Content & Custom 
Apps Extension (XCC) from TIMETOACT Software & Consulting 
GmbH. GBS completed the acquisition of one privately held 
business: in the fourth quarter, Vivant Digital (Vivant).
Agile 3 Solutions is a developer of software used by C-Suite 
and senior executives to better visualize, understand and 
manage risks associated with the protection of sensitive data 
and adds capabilities to the company’s security portfolio. The 
acquisition of the cloud and managed hosting services business 
of a large U.S. telecommunications company strengthens the 
company’s services portfolio and aligns with its cloud strategy. 
Cloudigo brings talent and technology that aligns closely with 
the company’s cloud platform investments in advanced network 
processing. XCC’s technology enhances IBM’s Connections Cloud 
platform by providing a single, accessible engagement center for 
sharing content. Vivant extends the strategy and design expertise 
of IBM Interactive Experience (IBM iX) and helps accelerate 
clients’ digital transformations.
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these 
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of 
December 31, 2017.
2017 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
Total 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$  18
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
    69
Intangible assets
   
Goodwill
N/A 
    16
Completed technology
5
    9
Client relationships
5–7
    64
Patents/trademarks
1–5
1
Total assets acquired
177 
Current liabilities
    (9)
Noncurrent liabilities
(34)
Total liabilities assumed
(43 )
Total purchase price
$134 
N/A—Not applicable
The overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable 
intangible assets acquired was 6.6 years. These identified 
intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over 
their useful lives. Goodwill of $13 million was assigned to the 
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms segment and goodwill 
of $3 million was assigned to the Cognitive Solutions segment. 
It was expected that approximately 50 percent of the goodwill 
will be deductible for tax purposes.
2016
In 2016, the company completed fifteen acquisitions at an 
aggregate cost of $5,899 million.
The Weather Company (TWC)—On January 29, 2016, the 
company completed the acquisition of TWC’s B2B, mobile 
and cloud-based Web-properties, weather.com, Weather 
Underground, The Weather Company brand and WSI, its global 
business-to-business brand, for cash consideration of $2,278 
million. The cable television segment was not acquired by IBM, 
but is licensing weather forecast data and analytics from IBM 
under a long-term contract. TWC was a privately held business. 
Goodwill of $1,717 million was assigned to the Cognitive 
Solutions segment. It was expected that none of the goodwill 
would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-
average useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired 
was 6.9 years.


===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
93
Truven Health Analytics, Inc. (Truven)—On April 8, 2016, the 
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Truven, 
a leading provider of healthcare analytics solutions, for cash 
consideration of $2,612 million, of which $2,412 million was paid 
in April 2016 and $148 million was paid in July 2017. Truven has 
developed proprietary analytic methods and assembled analytic 
content assets, creating extensive national healthcare utilization, 
performance, quality and cost data. Truven was a privately 
held business. Goodwill of $1,933 million was assigned to the 
Cognitive Solutions segment. It was expected that approximately 
15 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. 
The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified 
intangible assets acquired was 6.9 years.
Other Acquisitions—The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 
segment completed acquisitions of four businesses: in the first 
quarter, Ustream, Inc. (Ustream), a privately held business, 
and AT&T’s application and hosting services business; in the 
third quarter, G4S’s cash solutions business; and in the fourth 
quarter, Sanovi Technologies Private Limited (Sanovi), a privately 
held business. GBS completed acquisitions of six privately 
held businesses: in the first quarter, Resource/Ammirati, ecx 
International AG (ecx.io) and Optevia Limited (Optevia); in the 
second quarter, Aperto AG (Aperto) and Bluewolf Group, LLC 
(Bluewolf); and in the fourth quarter, Fluid, Inc.’s Expert Personal 
Shopper (XPS) business. The Cognitive Solutions segment 
completed acquisitions of three privately held businesses: in the 
second quarter, Resilient Systems, Inc. (Resilient) and EZ Legacy, 
Ltd. (EZSource); and in the fourth quarter, Promontory Financial 
Group, LLC (Promontory).
Ustream provides cloud-based video streaming to enterprises 
and broadcasters. The acquisition of AT&T’s application and 
hosting services business strengthens the company’s cloud 
portfolio. The acquisition of the G4S cash solutions business 
brings together the engineering skills of G4S with the company’s 
analytics and remote technology capabilities to expand delivery 
solutions. Sanovi provides hybrid cloud recovery, cloud migration 
and business continuity software for enterprise data centers 
and cloud infrastructure. Resource/Ammirati is a leading U.S.-
based digital marketing and creative agency, addressing the 
rising demand from businesses seeking to reinvent themselves 
for the digital economy. Ecx.io enhances GBS’ IBM iX with new 
digital marketing, commerce and platform skills to accelerate 
clients’ digital transformations. Optevia is a Software-as-
a-Service systems integrator specializing in CRM solutions 
for public sector organizations. Aperto also joined IBM iX, 
supporting the company’s growth in Europe, with expertise 
in digital strategy projects, including website and application 
development. Bluewolf extends the company’s analytics, 
experience design and industry consulting leadership with one 
of the world’s leading Salesforce consulting practices to deliver 
differentiated, consumer-grade experiences via the cloud. Fluid, 
Inc.’s Expert Personal Shopper business extends the company’s 
portfolio of SaaS offerings and services, helping clients conduct 
commerce and engage with their customers. Resilient, a provider 
of incident response solutions, automates and orchestrates the 
many processes needed when dealing with cyber incidents from 
breaches to lost devices. EZSource helps developers quickly 
and easily understand and change mainframe code based on 
data displayed through dashboards and other visualizations. 
Promontory, a global market-leading risk management and 
regulatory compliance consulting firm, helps address clients’ 
escalating regulations and risk management requirements.
All of these Other Acquisitions were for 100 percent of the 
acquired businesses.


===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
94
For the Other Acquisitions, the overall weighted-average life 
of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 
6.3 years. These identified intangible assets will be amortized 
on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of 
$119 million was assigned to the Technology Services & Cloud 
Platforms segment, goodwill of $303 million was assigned to the 
GBS segment and goodwill of $171 million was assigned to the 
Cognitive Solutions segment. It was expected that approximately 
55 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes.
Divestitures
Select IBM software products—On December 6, 2018, IBM 
and HCL Technologies Limited (HCL) announced a definitive 
agreement, in which HCL will acquire select standalone Cognitive 
Solutions software products for $1,775 million, inclusive of 
contingent consideration. The software products in-scope 
include AppScan, BigFix, Unica, Commerce, Portal, Notes, 
Domino and Connections. The transaction is expected to close 
in mid-2019, subject to the satisfaction of applicable regulatory 
requirements and customary closing conditions. IBM will receive 
cash consideration, with approximately half at closing and the 
remainder within 12 to 15 months of closing. The company 
expects to recognize a pre-tax gain upon closing, however, the 
amount of the gain is not yet determinable. At December 31, 
2018, the company concluded that the business did not meet 
the held for sale classification.
Seterus—On January 3, 2019, IBM and Mr. Cooper Group 
announced a definitive agreement, in which Mr. Cooper Group 
will acquire IBM’s Seterus home mortgage servicing platform 
business. The Seterus content has been reported in Global 
Process Services, within IBM’s GBS segment. The transaction 
is expected to close in the first quarter of 2019, subject to the 
satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and customary 
closing conditions. The financial terms related to this transaction 
are not material.
Other—On December 2, 2018, IBM entered into a definitive 
agreement to sell certain commercial financing capabilities and 
assign a number of its commercial financing contracts, excluding 
related receivables which will be collected as they become due 
in the normal course of business. These commercial financing 
capabilities and contracts have been reported within IBM’s 
Global Financing segment. The transaction is expected to close in 
the first quarter of 2019, subject to the satisfaction of applicable 
regulatory requirements and customary closing conditions. The 
financial terms related to the transaction were not material.
Others
2017—In the first quarter of 2017, the company completed one 
research-related divestiture. The Cognitive Solutions segment 
completed four divestitures; two in the second quarter of 2017 
and one each in the third and fourth quarter of 2017. The financial 
terms related to these transactions were not material. Overall, 
the company recognized a pre-tax gain of $31 million related to 
these transactions in 2017.
2016—In the first quarter of 2016, the company completed four 
software product-related divestitures. In the fourth quarter of 
2016, the company completed the divestiture of one service-
related offering. The financial terms related to these transactions 
were not material. Overall, the company recorded a pre-tax gain 
of $42 million related to these transactions in 2016.
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of 
December 31, 2016.
2016 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
 
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
The Weather 
Company
Truven Health 
Analytics
Other 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$     76
$   171
$   153
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
123
127
110
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,717
1,933
593
Completed technology
1–7
160
338
96
Client relationships
3–7
313
516
226
Patents/trademarks
1–7
349
54
42 
Total assets acquired
2,738
3,141
1,220
Current liabilities
(88)
(148)
(96)
Noncurrent liabilities
(372)
(381)
(76)
Total liabilities assumed
(460)
(529)
(171)
Bargain purchase gain
—
—
(40)*
Total purchase price
$2,278 
$2,612 
$1,009 
*	 Bargain purchase gain relating to AT&T’s application and hosting services business was recognized in selling, general and administrative expense in 
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in the three months ended March 31, 2016.
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
95
NOTE D. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring 
basis at December 31, 2018 and 2017.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit
$ —
$7,679
$ —
$7,679 (6)
Money market funds
25
—
—
25
Total
25
7,679
—
7,704
Equity investments (2)
0
—
—
0
Debt securities—current (3)
—
618
—
618 (6)
Derivative assets (4)
1
731
—
731 (7)
Total assets
$26
$9,028
$ —
$9,053 
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
$40
$   343
$ —
$   383 (7)
(1)	Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3)	Included within marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4)	The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2018 were $385 million and $347 million, respectively.
(5)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position at December 31, 2018 were $177 million and $206 million, respectively.
(6)	Available-for-sale debt securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the 
total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $267 million.


===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
96
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit
$  —
$  8,066
$ —
$  8,066
Commercial paper
       —
96
—
96
Money market funds
       26
—
—
26
Canadian government securities
—
398
—
398
Total
26
8,560
—
8,586 (6)
Equity investments (2)
4
—
—
4
Debt securities—current (3)
—
608
—
608 (6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2)
4
7
—
11
Derivative assets (4)
—
942
—
942 (7)
Total assets
$33
$10,117
$ —
$10,151
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
$  —
$     415
$ —
$     415 (7)
(1)	Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3)	U.S. Government securities reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4)	The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2017 were $185 million and $757 million, respectively.
(5)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position at December 31, 2017 were $377 million and $38 million, respectively.
(6)	Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the 
total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $255 million. 
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value
Short-Term Receivables and Payables
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments 
are financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair 
value. Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-
term debt (excluding the current portion of long-term debt) 
are financial liabilities with carrying values that approximate 
fair value. If measured at fair value in the financial statements, 
these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the 
fair value hierarchy, except for short-term debt, which would be 
classified as Level 2.
Loans and Long-Term Receivables
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using 
current interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with 
similar credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, the difference between the 
carrying amount and estimated fair value for loans and long-
term receivables was immaterial. If measured at fair value in 
the financial statements, these financial instruments would be 
classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. 
Long-Term Debt
Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted 
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an 
asset in an active market. For other long-term debt for which a 
quoted market price is not available, an expected present value 
technique that uses rates currently available to the company 
for debt with similar terms and remaining maturities is used to 
estimate fair value. The carrying amount of long-term debt was 
$35,605 million and $39,837 million and the estimated fair value 
was $36,599 million and $42,264 million at December 31, 2018 
and 2017, respectively. If measured at fair value in the financial 
statements, long-term debt (including the current portion) would 
be classified as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
Available-for-Sale Securities
Gross realized gains/losses from the sale of available-for-sale 
securities during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 
were immaterial. After-tax net unrealized holding gains/losses 
on available-for-sale securities that have been included in other 
comprehensive income/(loss) for the years ended December 31, 
2018 and 2017 were immaterial.


===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
97
During the fourth quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity 
securities in conjunction with the sale of the System x business 
which were classified as available-for-sale securities. Based on 
an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, 2015, 
the company recorded an other-than-temporary impairment 
loss of $86 million resulting in an adjusted cost basis of $185 
million as of December 31, 2015. In the first quarter of 2016, the 
company recorded a gross realized loss of $37 million (before 
taxes) related to the sale of all the outstanding shares. The loss 
on this sale was recorded in other (income) and expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity investments during 
the period were as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Proceeds
$0 
$7
$151
Gross realized gains  
(before taxes)
—
3
3
Gross realized losses  
(before taxes)
—
2
37
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale 
debt securities are less than one year at December 31, 2018.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and 
is a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In 
the normal course of business, the company is exposed to the 
impact of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, 
and to a lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and 
client credit risk. The company limits these risks by following 
established risk management policies and procedures, including 
the use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with 
debt in the currencies in which assets are denominated. For 
interest rate exposures, derivatives are used to better align 
rate movements between the interest rates associated with the 
company’s lease and other financial assets and the interest rates 
associated with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to 
manage the related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, 
derivatives are used to better manage the cash flow volatility 
arising from foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is 
exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts 
will fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the 
counterparty credit risk, the company has a policy of only 
entering into contracts with carefully selected major financial 
institutions based upon their overall credit profile. The company’s 
established policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk 
on principal transactions include reviewing and establishing 
limits for credit exposure and continually assessing the 
creditworthiness of counterparties. The right of setoff that exists 
under certain of these arrangements enables the legal entities 
of the company subject to the arrangement to net amounts due 
to and from the counterparty reducing the maximum loss from 
credit risk in the event of counterparty default.
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements 
with most of its major derivative counterparties. These 
arrangements require the company to hold or post collateral 
(cash or U.S. Treasury securities) when the derivative fair values 
exceed contractually established thresholds. Posting thresholds 
can be fixed or can vary based on credit default swap pricing 
or credit ratings received from the major credit agencies. The 
aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments under these 
collateralized arrangements that were in a liability position at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017 was $74 million and $126 million, 
respectively, for which no collateral was posted at either date. 
Full collateralization of these agreements would be required in 
the event that the company’s credit rating falls below investment 
grade or if its credit default swap spread exceeds 250 basis 
points, as applicable, pursuant to the terms of the collateral 
security arrangements. The aggregate fair value of derivative 
instruments in asset positions as of December 31, 2018 and 2017 
was $731 million and $942 million, respectively. This amount 
represents the maximum exposure to loss at the reporting date if 
the counterparties failed to perform as contracted. This exposure 
was reduced by $267 million and $255 million at December 31, 
2018 and 2017, respectively, of liabilities included in master 
netting arrangements with those counterparties. Additionally, at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, this exposure was reduced by $70 
million and $114 million of cash collateral, respectively. There 
were no non-cash collateral balances in U.S. Treasury securities 
at December 31, 2018 and 2017. At December 31, 2018 and 
2017, the net exposure related to derivative assets recorded 
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position was $395 
million and $572 million, respectively. At December 31, 2018 and 
2017, the net position related to derivative liabilities recorded 
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position was $116 
million and $160 million, respectively.


===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
98
In the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the company 
does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master 
netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or payables 
recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the 
fair values of the related derivative instruments. No amount was 
recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2018 and 2017 
for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The amount recognized in 
accounts payable for the obligation to return cash collateral was 
$70 million and $114 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, 
respectively. The company restricts the use of cash collateral 
received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports it in restricted 
cash in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. No 
amount was rehypothecated at December 31, 2018 and 2017. 
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge 
the volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in 
currency exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of 
the company with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, 
designated as net investment hedges, expose the company to 
liquidity risk as the derivatives have an immediate cash flow 
impact upon maturity which is not offset by a cash flow from 
the translation of the underlying hedged equity. The company 
monitors this cash loss potential on an ongoing basis and 
may discontinue some of these hedging relationships by 
de-designating or terminating the derivative instrument in 
order to manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated as 
accounting hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset 
the changes in the fair value of the de-designated instruments 
from the date of de-designation until maturity.
In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts, 
futures contracts, interest-rate swaps, cross-currency swaps, 
and options depending upon the underlying exposure. The 
company is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments.
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized 
by underlying risk, follows.
Interest Rate Risk
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets to fund 
its operations and financing business. Access to cost-effective 
financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the 
underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce 
overall interest cost, the company may use interest-rate swaps 
to convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate 
debt (i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-
rate debt issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). 
At December 31, 2018 and 2017, the total notional amount of 
the company’s interest-rate swaps was $7.6 billion and $9.1 
billion, respectively. The weighted-average remaining maturity 
of these instruments at December 31, 2018 and 2017 was 
approximately 3.5 years and 4.8 years, respectively. These 
interest rate contracts were accounted for as fair value hedges. 
The company did not have any cash flow hedges relating to this 
program outstanding at December 31, 2018 and 2017. 
Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future 
debt issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use 
instruments such as forward starting interest-rate swaps to lock 
in the rate on the interest payments related to the forecasted 
debt issuances. In connection with this program, in the fourth 
quarter of 2018, the company entered into forward starting 
interest-rate swaps. These swaps are linked to future interest 
payments on anticipated U.S. dollar debt issuances forecasted to 
occur throughout 2019 and 2020. These swaps are accounted for 
as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time over which the 
company has hedged its exposure to the variability in future cash 
flows is 30 years. As of December 31, 2018, the total notional 
amount of forward starting interest-rate swaps outstanding was 
$5.5 billion. The company did not have any derivative instruments 
relating to this program outstanding at December 31, 2017.
At December 31, 2018, in connection with cash flow hedges 
of forecasted interest payments related to the company’s 
borrowings, the company recorded net losses of $35 million 
(before taxes) in AOCI. None of the deferred net losses on 
derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2018 is expected to be 
reclassified to net income within the next 12 months.
Foreign Exchange Risk
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries  
(Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated 
debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in 
foreign subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ 
equity caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in 
the functional currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect 
to the U.S. dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps 
and foreign exchange forward contracts for this risk management 
purpose. At December 31, 2018 and 2017, the total notional 
amount of derivative instruments designated as net investment 
hedges was $6.4 billion and $7.0 billion, respectively. At 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, the weighted-average remaining 
maturity of these instruments was approximately 0.2 years at 
both periods.
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional 
currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany 
payments for royalties and goods and services among the 
company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the company. In 
anticipation of these foreign currency cash flows and in view of 
the volatility of the currency markets, the company selectively 
employs foreign exchange forward contracts to manage its 
currency risk. These forward contracts are accounted for as 
cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time over which the 
company has hedged its exposure to the variability in future cash 
flows is four years. At December 31, 2018 and 2017, the total 
notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash flow 
hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was $9.8 
billion and $7.8 billion, respectively. The weighted-average 
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2018 
and 2017 was 0.8 years and 0.7 years, respectively.


===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
99
At December 31, 2018 and 2017, in connection with cash 
flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the 
company recorded net gains of $342 million and net gains of 
$27 million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. The company 
estimates that $266 million (before taxes) of deferred net gains 
on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2018 will be reclassified 
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting 
economic impact against the underlying anticipated transactions.
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign 
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company 
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign 
currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in 
the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps 
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length 
of time over which the company has hedged its exposure to 
the variability in future cash flows is approximately ten years. 
At December 31, 2018 and 2017, the total notional amount of 
cross-currency swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign 
currency denominated debt was $6.5 billion at both periods. 
At December 31, 2018 and 2017, in connection with cash 
flow hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings, the 
company recorded net gains of $75 million and net gains of 
$42 million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. The company 
estimates that $189 million (before taxes) of deferred net gains 
on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2018, will be reclassified 
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting 
economic impact against the underlying exposure. 
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency  
Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the 
cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency 
swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In 
addition, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts 
to economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency 
exposure of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency 
assets and liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap 
contracts are generally less than one year. The changes in the 
fair values of these contracts and of the underlying hedged 
exposures are generally offsetting and are recorded in other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
At December 31, 2018 and 2017, the total notional amount of 
derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign currency 
exposure was $5.2 billion and $11.5 billion, respectively.
Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain 
broad market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily 
related to certain obligations to employees. Changes in the 
overall value of these employee compensation obligations 
are recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings. Although not designated as accounting hedges, 
the company utilizes derivatives, including equity swaps and 
futures, to economically hedge the exposures related to its 
employee compensation obligations. The derivatives are linked 
to the total return on certain broad market indices or the total 
return on the company’s common stock, and are recorded at 
fair value with gains or losses also reported in SG&A expense in 
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2018 
and 2017, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in 
economic hedges of these compensation obligations was $1.2 
billion and $1.3 billion, respectively.


===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
100
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets
Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
At December 31:
Balance Sheet 
Classification
2018
2017
Balance Sheet 
Classification
2018
2017
Designated as hedging 
instruments
Interest rate contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets
 
$    9
$    2
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
$       4
$       —
Investments and 
sundry assets
212
459
Other liabilities
76
34
Foreign exchange 
contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets
348
111
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
110
318
Investments and 
sundry assets
135
298
Other liabilities
129
3
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$704
$870 
Fair value of 
derivative liabilities
$   320
$   355
Not designated as hedging 
instruments
Foreign exchange 
contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets
 
$  26
$  61
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
$     13
$     57
Equity contracts
Prepaid expenses and 
other current assets
2
12
Other accrued 
expenses and liabilities
51
3
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$  28
$  72
Fair value of 
derivative liabilities
$     63
$     60
Total derivatives
$731
$942
$   383
$   415
Total debt designated as  
hedging instruments (1)
Short-term debt
N/A
N/A
$       —
$      —
Long-term debt
N/A
N/A
6,261
6,471
N/A
N/A
$6,261
$6,471
Total
$731
$942 
$6,644 
$6,886 
(1)	Debt designated as hedging instruments are reported at carrying value.
N/A—Not applicable
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common 
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed 
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settlement 
provisions. The company records the changes in the fair value of 
these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any warrants 
qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2018 
and 2017.
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to 
pay amounts due under contractual terms. The company may 
utilize credit default swaps to economically hedge its credit 
exposures. The swaps are recorded at fair value with gains 
and losses reported in other (income) and expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company did not have 
any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding 
at December 31, 2018 and 2017.
The company is exposed to market volatility on certain 
investment securities. The company may utilize options or 
forwards to economically hedge its market exposure. The 
derivatives are recorded at fair value with gains and losses 
reported in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2018 and 2017, the 
company did not have any derivative instruments relating to this 
program outstanding.
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the 
derivative and non-derivative instrument-related risk management 
activity at December 31, 2018 and 2017, as well as for the years 
ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.


===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
101
At December 31, 2018, the following amounts were recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position related to cumulative 
basis adjustments for fair value hedges:
($ in millions)
Line Item in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position  
in which the Hedged Item is Included
Carrying Amount 
of the Hedged Item 
Assets/(Liabilities)
Cumulative Amount 
of Fair Value Hedging 
Adjustment Included 
in the Carrying Amount 
of Assets/(Liabilities)
Short-term debt
$(1,878)
$    (4)(1)
Long-term debt
$(6,004)
$(333)(2)
(1)	Includes ($6) million of hedging adjustments on discontinued hedging relationships.
(2)	Includes ($213) million of hedging adjustments on discontinued hedging relationships.
The Effect of Derivative Instruments 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
The total amounts of income and expense line items presented 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in which the effects 
of fair value hedges, cash flow hedges, net investment hedges 
and derivatives not designated as hedging instruments are 
recorded and the total effect of hedge activity on these income 
and expense line items, are as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2018
Cost of 
Services
Cost of 
Sales
Cost of 
Financing
SG&A 
Expense
Other 
(Income) and 
Expense
Interest 
Expense
Total
$34,059
$7,464
$1,132
$19,366
$1,152
$723
Gains/(losses) of total hedge activity
30
8
(6)
(116)
(434)
(6)


===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
102
For the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, there 
were no material gains or losses excluded from the assessment 
of hedge effectiveness (for fair value or cash flow hedges), or 
associated with an underlying exposure that did not or was not 
expected to occur (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any 
anticipated in the normal course of business.
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings Line Item
Recognized on Derivatives 
Attributable to Risk  
Being Hedged (2)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (1) 
Interest rate contracts
Cost of financing
$  (61)
$    1
$   28
$  97
$  74
$  58
Interest expense
  (58)
1
31
92
69
63
Derivative instruments not designated  
as hedging instruments
Interest rate contracts
Other (income 
and expense
) 
—
—
0
N/A
N/A
N/A
Foreign exchange contracts
Other (income 
and expense
) 
(93)
16
(189)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Equity contracts
SG&A expense
(116)
135
112
N/A
N/A
N/A
Other (income 
and expense
) 
—
—
(1)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Total
$(327)
$153
$  (18)
$189
$144
$121
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
For the year ended 
December 31:
  
Recognized in OCI
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings Line Item
  
Reclassified from AOCI
 Amounts Excluded from  
Effectiveness Testing (3)
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
Derivative instruments 
in cash flow hedges
Interest rate 
contracts
$  (35) $       —
$    —
Cost of financing
$    —
$     —
$    —
$  —
$  —
$  —
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
—
—
Foreign exchange 
contracts
(101)
(58)
243
Cost of services
 
30
70
(8)
—
—
—
 Cost of sales 
8
3
(5)
—
—
—
 Cost of financing *
(75)
(23)
(12)
—
—
—
SG&A expense
0
11
4
—
—
—
 
Other (income 
and expense
) 
(341)
324
(68)
—
1
(3)
Interest expense*
(71)
(22)
(13)
—
—
—
Instruments in net 
investment hedges (4)
 
Foreign exchange 
contracts
686
(1,607)
311
 Cost of financing*
—
—
—
33
23
37
Interest expense*
—
—
—
31
21
40
Total
$  549 $(1,665)
$555
$(449)
$363
$(102)
$64
$45
$74
*	 Reclassified to conform to 2018 presentation.
Prior period gain or loss amounts and presentation are not conformed to the new hedge accounting guidance that the company adopted in 2018.  
Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for further information.
(1)	The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for  
coupon payments required under these derivative contracts. 
(2)	The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments 
recorded on de-designated hedging relationships during the period.
(3)	The company’s policy is to recognize all fair value changes in amounts excluded from effectiveness testing in net income each period. 
(4)	Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
N/A — Not applicable


===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
103
Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding 
at December 31, 2018, expressed as a percentage of the total, 
are approximately: 2019, 44 percent; 2020, 26 percent; 2021, 
18 percent; 2022, 9 percent; and 2023 and beyond, 3 percent.
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as collateral 
for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged as 
collateral for borrowings were $710 million and $773 million at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. These borrowings are 
included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 108 to 111.
The company did not have any financing receivables held for sale 
as of December 31, 2018 and 2017. 
NOTE E. INVENTORIES
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Finished goods
$   266
$   333
Work in process and raw materials
1,415
1,250
Total
$1,682
$1,583
NOTE F. FINANCING RECEIVABLES
Financing receivables primarily consist of investment in 
sales-type and direct financing leases, commercial financing 
receivables and client loan and installment payment receivables 
Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
The following tables present the recorded investment by 
portfolio segment and by class, excluding commercial financing 
receivables and other miscellaneous financing receivables at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017. Commercial financing receivables 
are excluded from the presentation of financing receivables 
by portfolio segment, as they are short term in nature and 
the current estimated risk of loss and resulting impact to the 
company’s financing results are not material. The company 
determines its allowance for credit losses based on two portfolio 
segments: lease receivables and loan receivables, and further 
segments the portfolio into three classes: Americas, Europe/
Middle East/Africa (EMEA) and Asia Pacific. 
(loans). Investment in sales-type and direct financing leases 
relates principally to the company’s systems products and are 
for terms ranging generally from two to six years. Commercial 
financing receivables relate primarily to inventory and accounts 
receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM 
products. Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable 
financing generally range from 30 to 90 days. Client loan and 
installment payment receivables (loans) are provided primarily 
to clients to finance the purchase of hardware, software and 
services. Payment terms on these financing arrangements are 
generally for terms up to seven years. Client loans and installment 
payment financing contracts are priced independently at 
competitive market rates.
A summary of the components of the company’s financing receivables is presented as follows:
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018:
Investment in 
Sales-Type and 
Direct Financing 
Leases
Commercial 
Financing 
Receivables
Client Loan and 
Installment 
Payment 
Receivables/
(Loans)
Total
Financing receivables, gross
$6,846
$11,889
$13,614
$32,348
Unearned income
(526)
(37)
(632)
(1,195)
Recorded investment
$6,320
$11,852
$12,981
$31,153
Allowance for credit losses
(99)
(13)
(179)
(292)
Unguaranteed residual value
589
—
—
589
Guaranteed residual value
85
—
—
85
Total financing receivables, net
$6,895
$11,838
$12,802
$31,536
Current portion
$2,834
$11,838
$  7,716
$22,388
Noncurrent portion
$4,061
$         —
$  5,086
$  9,148
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017:
Investment in 
Sales-Type and 
Direct Financing 
Leases
Commercial 
Financing 
Receivables
Client Loan and 
Installment 
Payment 
Receivables/
(Loans)
Total
Financing receivables, gross
$7,128
$11,649
$13,311
$32,087
Unearned income
(535)
(32)
(644)
(1,210)
Recorded investment
$6,593
$11,617
$12,667
$30,877
Allowance for credit losses
(103)
(21)
(211)
(336)
Unguaranteed residual value
630
—
—
630
Guaranteed residual value
100
—
—
100
Total financing receivables, net
$7,220
$11,596
$12,456
$31,272
Current portion
$2,900
$11,596
$  7,226
$21,721
Noncurrent portion
$4,320
$        —
$  5,230
$  9,550
 


===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
104
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018:
Americas
EMEA
Asia Pacific
Total
Recorded investment:
Lease receivables
$  3,827
$1,341
$1,152
$  6,320
Loan receivables
  6,817
3,675
2,489
12,981
Ending balance 
$10,644
$5,016
$3,641
$19,301
Recorded investment, collectively evaluated for impairment
$10,498
$4,964
$3,590
$19,052
Recorded investment, individually evaluated for impairment
$     146
$     52
$     51
$     249
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2018
Lease receivables
$       63
$       9
$     31
$     103
Loan receivables
108
52
51
211
Total
$     172
$     61
$     82
$     314
Write-offs
(10)
(2)
(23)
(35)
Recoveries
0
0
2
2
Provision
7
9
0
16
Other*
(11)
(3)
(4)
(19)
Ending balance at December 31, 2018
$     158
$     65
$     56
$     279
Lease receivables
$       53
$     22
$     24
$       99
Loan receivables
$     105
$     43
$     32
$     179
Related allowance, collectively evaluated for impairment
$       39
$     16
$       5
$       59
Related allowance, individually evaluated for impairment
$     119
$     49
$     51
$     219
*	 Primarily represents translation adjustments. 
Write-offs of lease receivables and loan receivables were 
$15 million and $20 million, respectively, for the year ended 
December 31, 2018. Provisions for credit losses recorded for 
lease receivables and loan receivables were $14 million and 
$2 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The average recorded investment of impaired leases and loans for 
Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific was $138 million, $55 million 
and $73 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 
2018. Both interest income recognized, and interest income 
recognized on a cash basis on impaired leases and loans were 
immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2018.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017:
Americas
EMEA
Asia Pacific
Total
Recorded investment:
Lease receivables
$  3,911
$1,349
$1,333
$  6,593
Loan receivables
6,715
3,597
2,354
12,667
Ending balance 
$10,626
$4,946
$3,687
$19,259
Recorded investment, collectively evaluated for impairment
$10,497
$4,889
$3,604
$18,990
Recorded investment, individually evaluated for impairment
$     129
$     57
$     83
$     269
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2017
Lease receivables
$       54
$       4
$     76
$     133
Loan receivables
     169
18
89
276
Total
$     223
$     22
$   165
$     410
Write-offs
      (51)
(1)
(85)
(137)
Recoveries
         1
1
0
2
Provision
         (8)
29
(4)
16
Other*
         7
11
6
24
Ending balance at December 31, 2017
$     172
$     61
$     82
$     314
Lease receivables
$       63
$       9
$     31
$     103
Loan receivables
$     108
$     52
$     51
$     211
Related allowance, collectively evaluated for impairment
$       43
$     15
$       6
$       64
Related allowance, individually evaluated for impairment
$     128
$     46
$     76
$     250
*	 Primarily represents translation adjustments.


===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
105
Write-offs of lease receivables and loan receivables were 
$55 million and $82 million, respectively, for the year ended 
December 31, 2017. Provisions for credit losses recorded for 
lease receivables and loan receivables were $9 million and $7 
million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2017.
The average recorded investment of impaired leases and loans for 
Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific was $158 million, $33 million 
and $122 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 
2017. Both interest income recognized, and interest income 
recognized on a cash basis on impaired leases and loans were 
immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2017. 
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are 
evaluated either on an individual or a collective basis. For 
individually evaluated receivables, the company determines the 
expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate 
of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For those 
accounts in which the loss is probable, the company records a 
specific reserve. The company considers any receivable with an 
individually evaluated reserve as an impaired receivable.
In addition, the company records an unallocated reserve that is 
determined by applying a reserve rate to its different portfolios, 
excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. This 
reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, 
term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history.
Past Due Financing Receivables
The company considers a client’s financing receivable balance past due when any installment is aged over 90 days. The following 
tables present summary information about the recorded investment in lease and loan financing receivables, including recorded 
investments aged over 90 days and still accruing, billed invoices aged over 90 days and recorded investment not accruing. 
($ in millions)
Total 
Recorded 
At December 31, 2018:                                                                                             Investment
 
 
Recorded 
Investment 
>90 Days(1)
Recorded 
Investment 
>90 Days and 
Accruing(1)
Billed 
Invoices >90 
Days and 
Accruing
 
 
 
Recorded 
Investment Not 
Accruing(2)
Americas
$  3,827
$310
$256
$19
$  57
EMEA
1,341
25
9
1
16
Asia Pacific
1,152
49
27
3
24
Total lease receivables
$  6,320
$385
$292
$24
$  97
Americas
$  6,817
$259
$166
$24
$  99
EMEA
3,675
98
25
3
73
Asia Pacific
2,489
40
11
1
31
Total loan receivables
$12,981
$397
$202
$29
$203
Total
$19,301
$782
$494
$52
$300
(1)	At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for financing receivables aged greater than 90 days. 
(2)	Of the recorded investment not accruing, $249 million is individually evaluated for impairment with a related allowance of $219 million.
($ in millions)
 Total 
Recorded 
At December 31, 2017:                                                                                             Investment
 
 
Recorded 
Investment 
>90 Days(1)
Recorded 
Investment 
>90 Days and 
Accruing(1)
Billed 
Invoices >90 
Days and 
Accruing
 
 
 
Recorded 
Investment Not 
Accruing(2) (3)
Americas
$  3,911
$239
$197
$29
$  44
EMEA
1,349
32
5
3
27
Asia Pacific
1,333
57
23
3
36
Total lease receivables
$  6,593
$328
$225
$36
$107
Americas
$  6,715
$345
$254
$38
$  96
EMEA
3,597
90
17
0
74
Asia Pacific
2,354
63
12
3
54
Total loan receivables
$12,667
$498
$283
$41
$224
Total 
$19,259
$825
$507
$77
$331
(1)	At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for financing receivables aged greater than 90 days. 
(2)	Of the recorded investment not accruing, $269 million is individually evaluated for impairment with a related allowance of $250 million.
(3)	Recast to conform to current period presentation, which includes billed impaired amounts.


===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
106
Credit Quality Indicators
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based 
on rating agency data, publicly available information and 
information provided by customers, are reviewed periodically 
based on the relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a 
numerical rating system that maps to Moody’s Investors Service 
credit ratings as shown below. The company uses information 
provided by Moody’s, where available, as one of many inputs in 
its determination of customer credit ratings.
The following tables present the recorded investment net 
of allowance for credit losses for each class of receivables, 
by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 2018 and 2017. 
Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging from Aaa to 
Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others are considered 
non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do not reflect 
mitigation actions that the company takes to transfer credit risk 
to third parties.
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018:
Americas
EMEA
Asia Pacific
Credit rating
Aaa–Aa3
$   593
$     45
$     85
A1–A3
678
158
413
Baa1–Baa3
892
417
297
Ba1–Ba2
852
426
191
Ba3–B1
433
171
84
B2–B3
299
90
50
Caa–D
26
10
7
Total
$3,774
$1,319
$1,128
Loan Receivables 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018:
Americas
EMEA
Asia Pacific
Credit rating
Aaa–Aa3
$1,055
$   125
$   185
A1–A3
1,206
436
901
Baa1–Baa3
1,587
1,148
648
Ba1–Ba2
1,516
1,175
417
Ba3–B1
770
472
184
B2–B3
531
249
109
Caa–D
47
28
15
Total
$6,712
$3,633
$2,457
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017:
Americas
EMEA
Asia Pacific
Credit rating
Aaa–Aa3
$   422
$     49
$     68
A1–A3
855
190
544
Baa1–Baa3
980
371
337
Ba1–Ba2
730
448
184
Ba3–B1
443
192
89
B2–B3
367
77
64
Caa–D
51
13
18
Total
$3,847
$1,340 
$1,302 
Loan Receivables 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017:
Americas
EMEA
Asia Pacific
Credit rating
Aaa–Aa3
$   724
$   129
$   120
A1–A3
1,469
502
961
Baa1–Baa3
1,683
982
596
Ba1–Ba2
1,253
1,186
325
Ba3–B1
760
508
157
B2–B3
630
204
113
Caa–D
88
34
31
Total
$6,607
$3,545
$2,303 
Troubled Debt Restructurings
The company did not have any significant troubled debt 
restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017. 
NOTE G. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Land and land improvements
$     448
$     480
Buildings and building and  
leasehold improvements
9,640
10,073
Information technology equipment
17,468
16,874
Production, engineering,  
office and other equipment
4,081
4,060
Plant and other property—gross
31,636
31,487
Less: Accumulated depreciation
21,276
20,832
Plant and other property—net
10,359
10,655
Rental machines
824
844
Less: Accumulated depreciation
392
383
Rental machines—net
433
462
Total—net
$10,792
$11,116 


===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
107
NOTE H. INVESTMENTS AND SUNDRY ASSETS
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Derivatives—noncurrent
$   347
$   757
Alliance investments
Equity method
192
90
Non-equity method
34
32
Long-term deposits
268
271
Other receivables
359
455
Employee benefit-related
263
316 
Prepaid income taxes
626
590
Other assets
296
272*
Total
$2,386
$2,783 *
*	 Recast to conform to 2018 presentation.
NOTE I. INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL
Intangible Assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset 
balances by major asset class.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,568
$   (629)
$   939
Client relationships
2,068
(1,123)
945
Completed technology
2,156
(1,296)
860
Patents/trademarks
641
(330)
311
Other*
56
(23)
32
Total
$6,489
$(3,402)
$3,087
*	 Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary 
business processes, methodologies and systems.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,600 
$   (790)
$   810
Client relationships
2,358
(1,080)
1,278
Completed technology
2,586
(1,376)
1,210
Patents/trademarks
668
(256)
413
Other*
47
(16)
31
Total
$7,260 
$(3,518)
$3,742 
*	 Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary 
business processes, methodologies and systems.
The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased $655 
million during the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due 
to intangible asset amortization, partially offset by additions 
resulting from capitalized software. There was no impairment 
of intangible assets recorded in 2018 and 2017. The aggregate 
intangible amortization expense was $1,353 million and $1,520 
million for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, 
respectively. In addition, in 2018 and 2017, respectively, the 
company retired $1,469 million and $1,753 million of fully 
amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross carrying 
amount and accumulated amortization by this amount.
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding 
years relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be 
the following at December 31, 2018:
($ in millions)
Capitalized 
Software
Acquired 
Intangibles
Total
2019
$461
$676
$1,137
2020
320
565
886
2021
157
450
608
2022
—
382
382
2023
—
64
64


===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
108
There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded during 2018 
or 2017 and the company has no accumulated impairment losses.
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2018 and 2017 were 
related to acquisitions that were still subject to the measurement 
period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition 
date or when information becomes available. Net purchase price 
adjustments recorded during 2018 were not material. Net purchase 
price adjustments of $38 million were recorded during 2017, with 
the primary drivers being deferred tax assets, other taxes payable 
and other current liabilities associated with the Truven Health 
Analytics, Inc. and The Weather Company acquisitions. 
NOTE J. BORROWINGS
Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Commercial paper
$  2,995
$1,496 
Short-term loans
161
276
Long-term debt—current maturities
7,051
5,214
Total
$10,207
$6,987 
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017 was 2.5 percent and 1.5 percent, 
respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term 
loans were 4.3 percent and 8.8 percent at December 31, 2018 
and 2017, respectively. 
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 are as follows:
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2018
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments*
  
Balance 
 December 31, 
 2018
Cognitive Solutions
$19,665 
$10
$ 0
$(1)
$(290)
$19,384
Global Business Services
4,813
24
(3)
  —
(92)
4,742
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
10,447
—
0
—
(156)
10,292
Systems
1,862
—
0
—
(15)
1,847
Total
$36,788
$34
$(3)
$(1)
$(553)
$36,265
*	 Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2017
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments*
Balance 
 December 31, 
2017
Cognitive Solutions
$19,484
$  3
$(38)
$(20)
$235
$19,665
Global Business Services
4,607
—
2
—
204
4,813
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
10,258
13
  (2)
—
179
10,447
Systems
1,850
—
0
—
13
1,862
Total
$36,199 
$16 
$(38)
$(20)
$631 
$36,788 
*	 Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.


===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
109
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31:
Maturities
2018
2017
U.S. dollar debt (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2018):*
3.5%
 2018
$       —
$  4,640
3.0%
2019 
  5,465
5,540
2.6%
2020
4,344
3,416
2.8%
 2021
5,529
4,129
2.4%
 2022
3,536
3,481
3.2%
2023
2,428
1,547
3.6%
2024
2,037
2,000
7.0%
2025
600
600
3.5%
2026
1,350
1,350
4.7%
2027
969
969
6.5%
2028
313
313
3.7%
2030
32
—
5.9%
2032
600
600
8.0%
2038
83
83
5.6%
2039
745
745
4.0%
2042
1,107
1,107
7.0%
2045
27
27
4.7%
2046
650
650
7.1%
2096
316
316
$30,131
$31,515
Other currencies (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2018, in 
parentheses):*
Euros (1.5%)
2019–2029
10,011
10,502
Pound sterling (2.7%)
2020–2022
1,338
1,420
Japanese yen (0.3%)
2022–2026
1,325
1,291
Other (5.6%)
2019–2022
391
717
43,196
45,445
Less: net unamortized discount
802
826
Less: net unamortized debt issuance costs
76
93
Add: fair value adjustment**
337
526
42,656
45,052
Less: current maturities
7,051
5,214
Total
$35,605
$39,837 
*	 Includes notes, debentures, bank loans, secured borrowings and capital lease obligations.
**	The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount 
equal to the sum of the debt’s carrying value and a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations 
attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
	 There are no debt securities issued and outstanding by IBM International Group Capital LLC, which is an indirect, 100 percent owned finance 
subsidiary of International Business Machines Corporation, the parent. Any debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC, would be 
fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the parent.
During the third quarter of 2017, IBM Credit LLC (IBM Credit), a 
wholly owned subsidiary of the company, filed a shelf registration 
statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
allowing it to offer for sale public debt securities. IBM Credit 
issued fixed- and floating-rate debt securities in September 
2017 in the aggregate amount of $3.0 billion with maturity dates 
ranging from 2019 to 2022. During 2018, IBM Credit issued fixed- 
and floating-rate debt securities in the aggregate amount of $4.0 
billion with maturity dates ranging from 2020 to 2023. This debt 
is included in the long-term debt table above.
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its 
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which 
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, 
limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale 
and leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s 
consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s 
ability to merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met. 
The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s 
consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less 


===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
110
than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect 
to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt 
covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. 
The failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an 
event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions 
apply. If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and 
interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would 
become immediately due and payable. 
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
2018
2017
For the year ended December 31:
Amount
Weighted-average 
Interest Rate
Amount
Weighted-average 
Interest Rate
Fixed-rate debt 
$28,770
2.7%
$29,007
2.7%
Floating-rate debt* 
13,886
3.0%
16,044
2.1%
Total
$42,656
$45,052
*	 Includes $7,563 million in 2018 and $9,138 million in 2017 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into 
floating-rate debt. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 95 to 102. 
Pre-swap annual contractual obligations of long-term debt 
outstanding at December 31, 2018, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Total
2019
$  7,050
2020
7,273
2021
6,647
2022
4,338
2023
3,403
2024 and beyond
14,485
Total
$43,196
Interest on Debt
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Cost of financing
$   757 
$   658
$   576
Interest expense
723
615
630
Interest capitalized
3
5
2
Total interest paid  
and accrued
$1,482 
$1,278 
$1,208 
Refer to the related discussion on page 143 in note U, “Segment 
Information,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing 
segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 95 to 
102 for a discussion of the use of foreign currency denominated 
debt designated as a hedge of net investment, as well as a 
discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps in the 
company’s debt risk management program.
Lines of Credit
On October 28, 2018, the company announced its intent 
to acquire all of the outstanding shares of Red Hat, Inc. In 
connection with this acquisition, IBM entered into a commitment 
letter under which certain banks committed to provide the 
company with a 364-day unsecured bridge term loan facility 
in an aggregate principal amount of up to $20 billion to fund 
the acquisition. The company also entered into a fee letter in 
connection with the 364-day bridge facility, under which the 
company incurred $40 million in upfront fees during the fourth 
quarter of 2018. The company expects to incur additional 
fees of up to approximately $25 million during the period the 
agreement remains in place. These upfront fees were capitalized 
and will be amortized to SG&A in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings over the expected term of the bridge term loan 
facility. For additional information on this transaction, see note 
C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures.”
On July 19, 2018, the company amended its existing $10.25 
billion Five-Year Credit Agreement. In addition, the company 
and IBM Credit LLC entered into a new $2.5 billion, 364-Day 
Credit Agreement, to replace the maturing $2.5 billion, 364-
Day agreement, and also amended the existing $2.5 billion 
Three-Year Credit Agreement. The amended Five-Year and 
Three-Year credit agreements included a modification of terms 
to account for the potential discontinuation of LIBOR and to 
extend the maturity dates. The new maturity dates for the Five-
Year and Three-Year Credit Agreements are July 20, 2023 and 
July 20, 2021, respectively. Each of the facility sizes remained 
unchanged. The total expense recorded by the company related 
to the Five-Year Credit Agreement was $6.7 million in 2018, 
$6.1 million in 2017 and $5.5 million in 2016. The total expense 
recorded by the company related to the 364-Day and Three-Year 
Credit Agreements was $2.1 million in 2018 and $2.8 million 
in 2017. The Five-Year Credit Agreement permits the company 
and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up to $10.25 billion on a 
revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary Borrowers will be 
unconditionally backed by the company. The company may also, 
upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of the additional 
banks not currently party to the Five-Year Credit Agreement, 
increase the commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an 
additional $1.75 billion. The 364-Day Credit Agreement and the 
Three-Year Credit Agreement allow the company and IBM Credit, 
(the Borrowers), to borrow up to an aggregate of $5 billion on a 
revolving basis. Neither Borrower is a guarantor or co-obligor 
of the other Borrower under the 364-Day and Three-Year Credit 
Agreements. Subject to certain conditions stated in the Five-
Year, 364-Day and Three-Year credit agreements (the “Credit 
Agreements”), the Borrowers may borrow, prepay and re-borrow 
amounts under the Credit Agreements at any time during the 


===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
111
term of the Credit Agreements. Funds borrowed may be used 
for the general corporate purposes of the Borrowers. Interest 
rates on borrowings under the Credit Agreements will be based 
on prevailing market interest rates, as further described in the 
Credit Agreements. The Credit Agreements contain customary 
representations and warranties, covenants, events of default, 
and indemnification provisions. The company believes that 
circumstances that might give rise to breach of these covenants 
or an event of default, as specified in the Credit Agreements, 
are remote.
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some of 
the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Interest 
rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary 
from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
As of December 31, 2018, there were no borrowings by the 
company, or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Facilities.
NOTE K. OTHER LIABILITIES
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Income tax reserves
$  4,195
$4,193 
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
1,380
1,583
Disability benefits
507
504
Derivative liabilities
206
38
Workforce reductions
736
804
Deferred taxes*
3,696
545
Other taxes payable
40
948
Environmental accruals
244
262
Warranty accruals
76
56
Asset retirement obligations
111
115
Acquisition related
13
88
Divestiture related** 
173
253
Other
796
577
Total
$12,174
$9,965 
*	 The increase in deferred taxes is due to the company’s election on 
GILTI and a reclass from other taxes payable.
**	Primarily related to the divestiture of the Microelectronics business.
In response to changing business needs, the company 
periodically takes workforce reduction actions to improve 
productivity, cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The 
noncurrent contractually obligated future payments associated 
with these activities are reflected in the workforce reductions 
caption in the previous table. The noncurrent liabilities are 
workforce accruals related to terminated employees who are 
no longer working for the company who were granted annual 
payments to supplement their incomes in certain countries. 
Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements, these 
required payments will continue until the former employee 
begins receiving pension benefits or passes away. Current 
liabilities are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities 
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and were 
immaterial at December 31, 2018. 
The company employs extensive internal environmental 
protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The 
company also participates in environmental assessments and 
cleanups at a number of locations, including operating facilities, 
previously owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s 
maximum exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be 
estimated and no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO 
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The 
total amounts accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities, 
including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect actual 
or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $255 million and 
$267 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. 
Estimated environmental costs are not expected to materially 
affect the consolidated financial position or consolidated results 
of the company’s operations in future periods. However, estimates 
of future costs are subject to change due to protracted cleanup 
periods and changing environmental remediation regulations.
As of December 31, 2018, the company was unable to estimate 
the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for 
certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are 
primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that 
is not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished 
and non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would 
remediate only if it performed major renovations of certain 
existing buildings. Because these conditional obligations have 
indeterminate settlement dates, the company could not develop 
a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company will 
continue to assess its ability to estimate fair values at each 
future reporting date. The related liability will be recognized once 
sufficient additional information becomes available. The total 
amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified 
as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
were $146 million and $152 million at December 31, 2018 and 
2017, respectively.
NOTE L. EQUITY ACTIVITY
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which 
892,479,411 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2018 and 
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par 
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2018. 
Stock Repurchases
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase 
IBM common stock. The company repurchased 32,949,233 
common shares at a cost of $4,447 million, 27,237,179 common 
shares at a cost of $4,323 million, and 23,283,400 common 
shares at a cost of $3,455 million in 2018, 2017 and 2016, 
respectively. These amounts reflect transactions executed 
through December 31 of each year. Actual cash disbursements 
for repurchased shares may differ due to varying settlement 
dates for these transactions. At December 31, 2018, $3,339 
million of Board common stock repurchase authorization was 
available. The company plans to purchase shares on the open 
market or in private transactions from time to time, depending 
on market conditions. As a result of the proposed transaction 
to acquire Red Hat, subject to closing, the company intends to 
suspend its share repurchase program in 2020 and 2021.


===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
112
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as 
part of its stock-based compensation plans and employees 
stock purchase plan: 3,998,245 shares in 2018, 4,311,998 
shares in 2017, and 3,893,366 shares in 2016. The company 
issued 424,589 treasury shares in 2018, 463,083 treasury 
shares in 2017 and 383,077 treasury shares in 2016, as a 
result of restricted stock unit releases and exercises of stock 
options by employees of certain acquired businesses and by 
non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the company’s stock-based 
compensation plans, 1,173,416 common shares at a cost of $171 
million, 1,226,080 common shares at a cost of $193 million, 
and 854,365 common shares at a cost of $126 million in 2018, 
2017 and 2016, respectively, were remitted by employees to the 
company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding 
requirements. These amounts are included in the treasury stock 
balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and 
the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2018:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$  (730)
$(172)
$  (902)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$      (2)
$     1
$      (1)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
—
—
—
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$      (2)
$     1
$      (1)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$  (136)
$   43
$    (93)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services
(30)
8
(22)
Cost of sales
(8)
3
(5)
Cost of financing
75
(19)
56
SG&A expense
0
0
0
Other (income) and expense
341
(86)
255
Interest expense
71
(18)
53
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$   313
$  (69)
$   244
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits)
$  (182)
$   31
$  (151)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(2,517)
576
(1,941)
Curtailments and settlements
11
(2)
9
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
(73)
5
(68)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,966
(632)
2,334
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$   204
$  (21)
$   184
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$  (215)
$(262)
$  (476)
(1)	These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note T, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for  
additional information.)


===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
113
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2017:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$  152
$   617
$   769
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$      1
$      (1)
$       0
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
1
0
1
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$      2
$      (1)
$       1
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$   (58 )
$        0
$    (58)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services
(70)
27
(43)
Cost of sales
(3)
1
(3)
Cost of financing*
23
(9)
14
SG&A expense
(11)
3
(9)
Other (income) and expense
(324)
124
(199)
Interest expense*
22
(8)
13
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$  (421)
$    137
$  (284)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) 
$        0
$         0
$        0
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
   682
   (201)
   481
Curtailments and settlements
19
(5)
14
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
(88)
29
(58)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,889
(1,006)
1,883
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$3,502
$(1,182)
$2,320
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$3,235
$   (429)
$2,806
*	 Reclassified to conform to 2018 presentation.
(1)	These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note T, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for  
additional information.)


===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
114
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2016:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$    (20)
$(120)
$   (140)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$    (38)
$   14
$     (23)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense
34
(13)
21
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$       (3)
$     1
$       (2)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$    243 
$  (80)
$    163
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services
8
(3)
5
Cost of sales
5
(5)
1
Cost of financing*
12
(4)
7
SG&A expense
(4)
(2)
(7)
Other (income) and expense
68
(26)
42
Interest expense*
13
(5)
8
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$    345
$(126)
$    219
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
$(2,490)
$ 924
$(1,566)
Curtailments and settlements
(16)
1
(15)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
(107)
34
(74)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses
2,764
(976)
1,788
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$    150
$  (19)
$    132
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$    472
$(263)
$    209
*	 Reclassified to conform to 2018 presentation.
(1)	These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note T, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for  
additional information.)
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Unrealized 
Gains/(Losses 
on Cash Flow 
Hedges
) 
 
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
Adjustments*
Net Change 
Retirement- 
Related 
Benefit Plans
Net Unrealized 
Gains/(Losses 
on Available- 
For-Sale 
Securities
) 
 
 
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2015
$ 100
$(3,463)
$(26,248)
$   5
$(29,607)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
163
(140)
(1,581)
(23)
(1,581)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other 
comprehensive income
56
0
1,714
21
1,791
Total change for the period
219
(140)
132
(2)
209
December 31, 2016
319
(3,603)
(26,116)
2
(29,398)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
(58)
769
495
0
1,206
Amount reclassified from accumulated other 
comprehensive income
(226)
0
1,825
1
1,599
Total change for the period
(284)
769
2,320
1
2,806
December 31, 2017
35
(2,834)
(23,796)
3
(26,592)
Cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle** 
5
46
(2,471)
(2)
(2,422)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
(93)
(902)
(2,092)
(1)
(3,089)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other 
comprehensive income
337
—
2,276
—
2,612
Total change for the period
244
(902)
184
(1)
(476)
December 31, 2018
$ 284
$(3,690)
$(26,083)
$   0 
$(29,490)
*	 Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
**Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on stranded tax effects, hedging and financial instruments. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes.”


===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
115
NOTE M. CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with 
clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as 
plaintiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, 
suits, investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise 
from time to time in the ordinary course of its business. The 
company is a leader in the information technology industry 
and, as such, has been and will continue to be subject to claims 
challenging its IP rights and associated products and offerings, 
including claims of copyright and patent infringement and 
violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In addition, the 
company enforces its own IP against infringement, through 
license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical 
for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to 
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide 
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related 
to contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and 
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and 
other benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, 
product liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law 
and environmental matters. These actions may be commenced 
by a number of different parties, including competitors, clients, 
current or former employees, government and regulatory 
agencies, stockholders and representatives of the locations in 
which the company does business. Some of the actions to which 
the company is party may involve particularly complex technical 
issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under the 
laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise.
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, 
investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability 
has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably 
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such 
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 
2016 were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the 
company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood 
of material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the 
company also discloses matters based on its consideration of 
other matters and qualitative factors, including the experience 
of other companies in the industry, and investor, customer and 
employee relations considerations.
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and 
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this 
time that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for 
example, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength 
of the company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the 
remaining claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed 
in this note, except as specifically discussed herein, the company 
is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible losses or 
range of losses, including losses in excess of amounts accrued, 
if any, for the following reasons.
Claims, suits, investigations and proceedings are inherently 
uncertain, and it is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome 
of these matters. It is the company’s experience that damage 
amounts claimed in litigation against it are unreliable and 
unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not meaningful 
indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, the 
company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number 
of other factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations 
and proceedings, including considerations of the procedural 
status of the matter in question, the presence of complex or novel 
legal theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and development 
of information important to the matters. The company reviews 
claims, suits, investigations and proceedings at least quarterly, 
and decisions are made with respect to recording or adjusting 
provisions and disclosing reasonably possible losses or range 
of losses (individually or in the aggregate), to reflect the impact 
and status of settlement discussions, discovery, procedural and 
substantive rulings, reviews by counsel and other information 
pertinent to a particular matter.
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined 
in any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably 
have a material effect on the company’s business, financial 
condition, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a 
number of variables, including: the timing and amount of such 
losses or damages; the structure and type of any such remedies; 
the significance of the impact any such losses, damages or 
remedies may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements; 
and the unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter 
that may give rise to additional factors. While the company 
will continue to defend itself vigorously, it is possible that the 
company’s business, financial condition, results of operations 
or cash flows could be affected in any particular period by the 
resolution of one or more of these matters.
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters 
involving the company.
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 in 
state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM). 
The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff 
is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP 
rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition, 
interference with contract and breach of contract with regard to 
the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of 
code to Linux and the company has asserted counterclaims. On 
September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, 
and all proceedings in this case were stayed. The court in another 
suit, the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010. 
The jury found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare 
copyrights; the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated 
to recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and 
Sequent for breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30, 
2011, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district 


===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
116
court’s ruling and denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In June 
2013, the Federal Court in Utah granted SCO’s motion to reopen 
the SCO v. IBM case. In February 2016, the Federal Court ruled in 
favor of IBM on all of SCO’s remaining claims, and SCO appealed. 
On October 30, 2017, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed 
the dismissal of all but one of SCO’s remaining claims, which was 
remanded to the Federal Court in Utah.
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf 
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued 
one another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the 
modernization of social service program processing in Indiana. 
After six weeks of trial, on July 18, 2012, the Indiana Superior 
Court in Marion County rejected the State’s claims in their 
entirety and awarded IBM $52 million plus interest and costs. 
On February 13, 2014, the Indiana Court of Appeals reversed 
portions of the trial judge’s findings, found IBM in material breach, 
and ordered the case remanded to the trial judge to determine 
the State’s damages, if any. The Indiana Court of Appeals also 
affirmed approximately $50 million of the trial court’s award 
of damages to IBM. On March 22, 2016, the Indiana Supreme 
Court affirmed the outcome of the Indiana Court of Appeals and 
remanded the case to the Indiana Superior Court. On August 7, 
2017, the Indiana Superior Court awarded the State $128 million, 
which it then offset against IBM’s previously affirmed award of 
$50 million, resulting in a $78 million award to the State, plus 
interest. On September 28, 2018, the Indiana Court of Appeals 
affirmed the Superior Court’s $78 million award to the State, 
but reversed the Superior Court by awarding IBM prejudgment 
interest on its previously affirmed $50 million award. In January 
2019, the Indiana Supreme Court agreed to hear both parties’ 
appeals. The matter remains pending. 
On March 9, 2017, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania’s 
Department of Labor and Industry sued IBM in Pennsylvania 
state court regarding a 2006 contract for the development of 
a custom software system to manage the Commonwealth’s 
unemployment insurance benefits programs. The matter is 
pending in a Pennsylvania court.
Following the 2017 final judgment of the Appeal Court in London 
holding that IBM UK acted lawfully in 2010 in closing its UK 
defined benefit plans to future accruals for most participants 
and in implementing a new retirement policy, the Employment 
Tribunal in Southampton UK is expected to address approximately 
290 individual actions alleging constructive dismissal and age 
discrimination brought against IBM UK in 2010 by employees 
who left the company at that time. The individual actions were 
previously stayed.
In May 2015, a putative class action was commenced in the 
United States District Court for the Southern District of New York 
related to the company’s October 2014 announcement that it 
was divesting its global commercial semiconductor technology 
business, alleging violations of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act (ERISA). Management’s Retirement Plans 
Committee and three current or former IBM executives are 
named as defendants. On September 29, 2017, the Court granted 
the defendants’ motion to dismiss the first amended complaint. 
On December 10, 2018, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals 
reversed the District Court order and the matter remains pending.
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings 
brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation 
and Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws 
similar to CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible 
parties to participate in remediation activities regardless of 
fault or ownership of sites. The company is also conducting 
environmental investigations, assessments or remediations at or 
in the vicinity of several current or former operating sites globally 
pursuant to permits, administrative orders or agreements with 
country, state or local environmental agencies, and is involved 
in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current or former 
operating sites.
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and 
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with 
many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company 
is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities 
regarding non-income tax assessments and non-income tax 
litigation matters. The total potential amount related to all these 
matters for all applicable years is approximately $900 million. 
The company believes it will prevail on these matters and that 
this amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability. 


===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
117
Commitments
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities 
include unused amounts of $7,368 million and $8,111 million at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. A portion of these 
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to 
support their working capital needs. In addition, the company 
has committed to provide future financing to its clients in 
connection with client purchase agreements for approximately 
$4,432 million and $3,569 million at December 31, 2018 and 
2017, respectively.
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor 
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of 
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following 
is a description of arrangements in which the company is the 
guarantor.
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant 
to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with 
respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in 
the context of contracts entered into by the company, under 
which the company customarily agrees to hold the other party 
harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations 
and covenants related to such matters as title to assets sold, 
certain IP rights, specified environmental matters, third-party 
performance of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain 
income taxes. In each of these circumstances, payment by 
the company is conditioned on the other party making a claim 
pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract, 
the procedures of which typically allow the company to challenge 
the other party’s claims. While typically indemnification 
provisions do not include a contractual maximum on the 
company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these 
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of 
claim, and in some instances, the company may have recourse 
against third parties for certain payments made by the company.
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of 
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the 
conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique 
facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. 
Historically, payments made by the company under these 
agreements have not had a material effect on the company’s 
business, financial condition or results of operations.
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial 
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under 
these financial guarantees was $26 million and $19 million at 
December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The fair value of the 
guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position was immaterial.
NOTE N. TAXES
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Income from continuing 
operations before  
income taxes
U.S. operations
$     627
$     560
$  3,650
Non-U.S. operations
10,715
10,840 
8,680 
Total income from  
continuing operations 
before income taxes
$11,342 
$11,400 
$12,330 
The income from continuing operations provision for income 
taxes by geographic operations is as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
U.S. operations
$1,199
$2,923 
$   38 
Non-U.S. operations
1,420
2,719
411
Total continuing operations 
provision for income taxes
$2,619
$5,642 
$449 
The components of the income from continuing operations 
provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
U.S. federal
Current
$  (342)
$2,388
$   186
Deferred
1,377
77
(746)
$1,035
$2,465
$  (560)
U.S. state and local
Current
$   127
$     55
$   244
Deferred
(292)
28
(44)
$  (165)
$     83
$   200
Non-U.S.
Current
$2,135
$3,891
$   988
Deferred
(386)
(797)
(179)
$1,749
$3,094
$   809
Total continuing operations 
provision for income taxes
$2,619
$5,642
$   449
Discontinued operations  
provision for/(benefit from) 
income taxes
2
(3)
(2)
Provision for social security, 
real estate, personal 
property and other taxes
3,322
3,434
3,417
Total taxes included  
in net income
$5,943
$9,073 
$3,864 


===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
118
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the 
company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations is 
as follows: 
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Statutory rate
21%
35%
35%
Enactment of U.S. tax reform
18
48
—
Tax differential on          
foreign income
(11)
(26)
(21)
Intra-entity transfers
0
(5)
—
Domestic incentives
(1)
(2)
(1)
State and local
(1)
1
1
Japan resolution
—
—
(10)
Other
(3)
(2)
0
Effective rate
23%
49%
4%
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes.
The significant components reflected within the tax rate 
reconciliation labeled “Tax differential on foreign income” 
include the effects of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates 
other than the U.S. statutory rate, foreign export incentives, U.S. 
taxes on foreign income and any net impacts of intercompany 
transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements, 
excluding the 2016 Japan resolution, or changes in the amount 
of unrecognized tax benefits associated with each of these items.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was 
enacted. U.S. tax reform introduced many changes, including 
lowering the U.S. corporate tax rate to 21 percent, changes in 
incentives, provisions to prevent U.S. base erosion and significant 
changes in the taxation of international income, including 
provisions which allow for the repatriation of foreign earnings 
without U.S. tax. The enactment of U.S. tax reform resulted in 
the company recording a provisional tax expense charge of $5.5 
billion in the fourth quarter and year ended December 31, 2017. 
This charge was the result of the one-time U.S. transition tax and 
any foreign tax costs on undistributed foreign earnings, as well 
as the remeasurement of deferred tax balances to the new U.S. 
federal tax rate. All components of the provisional charge were 
based on the company’s estimates as of December 31, 2017. 
During the fourth quarter of 2018, the company completed its 
accounting for impacts of U.S. tax reform and the effects of 
measurement period adjustments were recognized as charges 
of $2.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018, including 
$1.9 billion in the fourth quarter of 2018. The adjustments were 
primarily attributable to the company’s election to include GILTI 
in measuring deferred taxes, plus refinements to the one-time 
U.S. transition tax and foreign tax costs on undistributed foreign 
earnings. The net impact of the measurement period adjustments 
on the 2018 effective tax rate was 17.7 percent. 
The U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act introduced GILTI which subjects 
a U.S. shareholder to current tax on income earned by certain 
foreign subsidiaries. The company elected the deferred method 
which resulted in an increase to tax expense and deferred tax 
liabilities of $2.0 billion in the fourth quarter and year ended 
December 31, 2018. Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting 
Policies,” on pages 76 to 88 for additional information. 
In January 2019, the U.S. Treasury and Internal Revenue Service 
issued additional U.S. tax reform guidelines. The company is still 
evaluating the impact of these guidelines.
The 2018 continuing operations effective tax rate decreased 26.4 
points from 2017 driven by: a decrease in the tax charges related 
to the impact of U.S. tax reform described above (30.4 points), a 
benefit related to domestic and foreign audit activity (6.8 points), 
a more favorable mix of pre-tax earnings in 2018 (2.1 points) and 
the re-assessment of valuation allowances (1.2 points). These 
benefits were partially offset by a lower benefit year to year in 
the utilization of foreign tax credits (5.9 points) and benefits in 
2017 related to an intra-entity asset transfer (5.1 points) and a 
tax write down of an intercompany investment (1.7 points), as well 
as a year-to-year increase in tax charges related to intercompany 
payments (1.3 points). 
With the exception of the impact of U.S. tax reform, the effect of 
tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities did not have 
a material impact on the company’s effective tax rate. 
Deferred Tax Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Retirement benefits
$3,620
$3,477
Share-based and other compensation
636
646
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards
964
718
Deferred income
674
605
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards
903
1,024
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves
348
395
Depreciation
231
293
Accruals
336
387
Intangible assets
620
585
Other
1,501
1,396
Gross deferred tax assets
9,833
9,526
Less: valuation allowance
915
1,004
Net deferred tax assets
$8,918
$8,522 
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
Depreciation
$   719
$   641 
Retirement benefits
455
483
Goodwill and intangible assets
1,200
1,226
Leases
580
584
Software development costs
292
360
Deferred transition costs
233
254
GILTI deferred taxes
1,927
—
Undistributed foreign earnings*
981
—
Other
1,011
658
Gross deferred tax liabilities
$7,398
$4,206 
*	 Year-to-year increase primarily driven by a reclass from other taxes 
payable within other liabilities.


===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
119
For financial reporting purposes, the company has foreign and 
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $584 
million, as well as foreign and domestic credit carryforwards 
of $1,283 million. Substantially all of these carryforwards are 
available for at least two years and the majority are available for 
10 years or more.
The valuation allowances as of December 31, 2018, 2017 and 
2016 were $915 million, $1,004 million and $916 million, 
respectively. The amounts principally apply to certain foreign 
and domestic loss carryforwards and credits. In the opinion of 
management, it is more likely than not that these assets will not 
be realized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to 
these carryforwards are realized in the future, the reduction in 
the valuation allowance will reduce income tax expense.
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 
2018 decreased by $272 million in 2018 to $6,759 million. 
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of 
unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
($ in millions)
2018
2017
2016
Balance at January 1
$ 7,031
$3,740 
$ 4,574 
Additions based on tax 
positions related to the 
current year
394
3,029
560
Additions for tax positions  
of prior years
1,201
803
334
Reductions for tax positions 
of prior years (including 
impacts due to a lapse of 
statute)
(1,686)
(367)
(1,443)
Settlements
(181)
(174)
(285)
Balance at December 31
$ 6,759
$7,031 
$ 3,740 
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current 
and prior years are primarily attributable to U.S. federal and state 
tax matters, as well as non-U.S. tax matters, including transfer 
pricing, credits and incentives. The settlements and reductions 
to unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions of prior years are 
primarily attributable to the resolution of certain U.S. federal 
audit activity, non-U.S. audits and impacts due to lapse of statute 
of limitations.
The unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2018 of 
$6,759 million can be reduced by $718 million associated with 
timing adjustments, U.S. tax credits, potential transfer pricing 
adjustments, and state income taxes. The net amount of $6,041 
million, if recognized, would favorably affect the company’s 
effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2017 and 
2016 were $6,064 million and $2,965 million, respectively.
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are 
included in income tax expense. During the year ended 
December 31, 2018, the company recognized a net benefit of $14 
million in interest expense and penalties; in 2017, the company 
recognized $174 million in interest expense and penalties; and, 
in 2016, the company recognized $62 million in interest expense 
and penalties. The company has $680 million for the payment of 
interest and penalties accrued at December 31, 2018, and had 
$799 million accrued at December 31, 2017.
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably 
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits 
associated with certain positions may be reduced. The potential 
decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is associated 
with the anticipated resolution of various U.S. state and non-
U.S. audits. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax 
benefits at December 31, 2018 could be reduced by $551 million.
The company’s U.S. income tax returns for 2013 and 2014 
continue to be examined by the IRS with specific focus on certain 
cross-border transactions in 2013. Although the IRS could 
propose additional adjustments related to these transactions, 
the company believes it is adequately reserved on these matters. 
In the third quarter of 2018, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service 
commenced its audit of the company’s U.S. tax returns for 
2015 and 2016. The company anticipates that this audit will be 
completed in 2020. With respect to major U.S. state and foreign 
taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer subject 
to tax examinations for years prior to 2014. The company is no 
longer subject to income tax examination of its U.S. federal tax 
return for years prior to 2013. The open years contain matters 
that could be subject to differing interpretations of applicable tax 
laws and regulations as it relates to the amount and/or timing of 
income, deductions and tax credits. Although the outcome of tax 
audits is always uncertain, the company believes that adequate 
amounts of tax, interest and penalties have been provided for any 
adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
The company is involved in a number of income tax-related 
matters in India challenging tax assessments issued by the 
India Tax Authorities. As of December 31, 2018, the company 
has recorded $660 million as prepaid income taxes in India. A 
significant portion of this balance represents cash tax deposits 
paid over time to protect the company’s right to appeal various 
income tax assessments made by the India Tax Authorities. The 
company believes it will prevail on these matters.
Within consolidated retained earnings at December 31, 2018 
are undistributed after-tax earnings from certain non-U.S. 
subsidiaries that are not indefinitely reinvested. At December 31, 
2018, the company has a deferred tax liability of $981 million 
for the estimated taxes associated with the repatriation of these 
earnings. Undistributed earnings of approximately $300 million 
and other outside basis differences in foreign subsidiaries are 
indefinitely reinvested in foreign operations. Quantification of the 
deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested 
earnings and outside basis differences is not practicable.


===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
120
NOTE O. REVENUE RECOGNITION
Disaggregation of Revenue
The following tables provide details of revenue by major products/services offerings and by geography.
Revenue by Major Products/Service Offerings
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2018:
Cognitive 
Solutions
Global 
Business 
Services
Technology 
Services 
& Cloud 
Platforms
Systems
Global 
Financing
Other
Total 
Revenue
Solutions Software
$12,903
$        —
$        —
$      —
$      —
$    —
$12,903
Transaction Processing Software
5,578
—
—
—
—
—
5,578
Consulting
—
7,705
—
—
—
—
7,705
Global Process Services
—
1,259
—
—
—
—
1,259
Application Management
—
7,852
—
—
—
—
7,852
Infrastructure Services
—
—
23,007
—
—
—
23,007
Technical Support Services
—
—
6,961
—
—
—
6,961
Integration Software
—
—
4,493
—
—
—
4,493
Systems Hardware
—
—
—
6,363
—
—
6,363
Operating Systems Software
—
—
—
1,671
—
—
1,671
Global Financing*
—
—
—
—
1,590
—
1,590
Other Revenue
—
—
—
—
—
207
207
Total
$18,481
$16,817
$34,462
$8,034
$1,590
$207
$79,591
*	 Contains lease and loan/working capital financing arrangements which are not subject to the guidance on revenue from contracts with customers.
Revenue by Geography
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2018:
Total 
Revenue
Americas
$36,994 
Europe/Middle East/Africa
25,491
Asia Pacific
17,106
Total
$79,591 
Remaining Performance Obligations
The remaining performance obligation (RPO) disclosure 
provides the aggregate amount of the transaction price yet 
to be recognized as of the end of the reporting period and an 
explanation as to when the company expects to recognize these 
amounts in revenue. It is intended to be a statement of overall 
work under contract that has not yet been performed and does 
not include contracts in which the customer is not committed, 
such as certain as-a-Service, governmental, term software 
license and services offerings. The customer is not considered 
committed when they are able to terminate for convenience 
without payment of a substantive penalty. The disclosure 
includes estimates of variable consideration, except when the 
variable consideration is a sales-based or usage-based royalty 
promised in exchange for a license of intellectual property.
Additionally, as a practical expedient, the company does not 
include contracts that have an original duration of one year or 
less. Remaining performance obligation estimates are subject 
to change and are affected by several factors, including 
terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic 
revalidations, adjustments for revenue that has not materialized 
and adjustments for currency. 
At December 31, 2018, the aggregate amount of the transaction 
price allocated to RPO related to customer contracts that are 
unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied was $124 billion. Given the 
profile of contract terms, approximately 60 percent of this 
amount is expected to be recognized as revenue over the next 
two years, approximately 35 percent between three and five 
years and the balance (mostly Infrastructure Services) thereafter.
Revenue Recognized for Performance Obligations
Satisfied (or Partially Satisfied) in Prior Periods
For the year ended December 31, 2018, revenue was reduced 
by $51 million for performance obligations satisfied (or partially 
satisfied) in previous periods mainly due to changes in estimates 
on percentage-of-completion based contracts. Refer to note A, 
“Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information on 
percentage-of-completion contracts and estimates of costs 
to complete.


===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
121
Reconciliation of Contract Balances
The following table provides information about notes and accounts receivables—trade, contract assets and deferred income balances:
The amount of revenue recognized during the year ended 
December 31, 2018 that was included within the deferred income 
balance at January 1, 2018 was $10.2 billion and primarily 
related to services and software. 
Deferred Costs
($ in millions)
At December 31, 
2018
Capitalized costs to obtain a contract
$   717 
Deferred costs to fulfill a contract:
Deferred setup costs
2,085
Other deferred fulfillment costs
2,173
Total deferred costs (1)
$4,975 
(1)	Of the total, $2,300 million is current and $2,676 million is noncurrent. 
Prior to January 1, 2018, the current and noncurrent balance of 
deferred costs were included within prepaid expenses and other 
current assets and investments and sundry assets, respectively.
On January 1, 2018, in accordance with the transition guidance, 
$737 million of in-scope sales commissions that were previously 
recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings were 
capitalized as costs to obtain a contract. The amount of total 
deferred costs amortized during the year ended December 31, 
2018 was $3,690 million. There were no material impairment 
losses incurred during the period. Refer to note A, “Significant 
Accounting Policies,” for additional information on deferred costs 
to fulfill a contract and capitalized costs of obtaining a contract.
Transition Disclosures
In accordance with the modified retrospective method transition 
requirements, the company has presented the financial statement 
line items impacted and adjusted to compare to presentation 
under the prior GAAP for each of the annual periods during the 
first year of adoption of the new revenue standard. The following 
tables summarize the impacts as of and for the year ended 
December 31, 2018. The adjustments to prior GAAP include 
results of the transition adjustments recorded at adoption and 
current period impacts. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” 
for additional information on the transition adjustments.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 
2018
At January 1, 
2018(2)
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $309 and $297 
at December 31, 2018 and January 1, 2018, respectively)
$  7,432
$  8,295
Contract assets (1)
470
557
Deferred income (current)
11,165
11,493
Deferred income (noncurrent)
3,445
3,758
(1)	Included within prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	As adjusted, upon adoption of the revenue standard on January 1, 2018.
Consolidated Statement of Earnings Impacts
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2018:
As Reported 
under New 
Revenue 
Standard
Adjustments 
to Convert 
to Prior GAAP
Adjusted 
Amounts 
under Prior 
GAAP
Revenue
$79,591
$   (63)
$79,528
Cost
42,655
(40)
42,615
Gross profit
36,936
(23)
36,912
Selling, general and administrative expense
19,366
7
19,373
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
11,342
(30)
11,312
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes
2,619
(6)
2,613
Net income
$  8,728
$   (24)
$  8,704
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock—continuing operations:
      
       
      
Assuming dilution
$    9.51
$(0.03)
$    9.49
Basic
$    9.56
$(0.03)
$    9.54


===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
122
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Impacts
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018:
As Reported 
under New 
Revenue 
Standard
Adjustments 
to Convert 
to Prior GAAP
Adjusted 
Amounts 
under Prior 
GAAP
Assets:
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances)
$    7,432
$ 533
$    7,965
Deferred costs (current)
2,300
(273)
2,027
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
2,378
(430)
1,948
Deferred taxes
5,216
190
5,406
Deferred costs (noncurrent)
2,676
(444)
2,231
Investments and sundry assets
2,386
—
2,386
Total assets
$123,382
$(425)
$122,957
Liabilities:
Taxes
$    3,046
$   56
$    3,102
Deferred income (current)
11,165
67
11,232
Deferred income (noncurrent)
3,445
31
3,476
Total liabilities
$106,452
$ 154
$106,606
Equity:
Retained earnings
$159,206
$(604)
$158,601
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(29,490)
   26
 (29,464)
Total stockholders’ equity
$  16,929
$(578)
$  16,351
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
$123,382
$(425)
$122,957
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Impacts
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2018:
As Reported 
under New 
Revenue 
Standard
Adjustments 
to Convert 
to Prior GAAP
Adjusted 
Amounts 
under Prior 
GAAP
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net income
$  8,728
$(24)
$  8,704
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by operating activities:
Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
554
24
578
Net cash provided by operating activities
$15,247
$  —
$15,247
NOTE P. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING
RD&E expense was $5,379 million in 2018, $5,590 million in 
2017 and $5,726 million in 2016. Amounts for 2017 and 2016 
have been recast to reflect the adoption of the FASB guidance 
on presentation of net benefit cost. 
The company incurred total expense of $5,027 million, $5,170 
million and $5,394 million in 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively, 
for scientific research and the application of scientific advances 
 
to the development of new and improved products and their uses, 
as well as services and their application. Within these amounts, 
software-related expense was $3,050 million, $3,145 million and 
$3,441 million in 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Expense for product-related engineering was $352 million, 
$420  million and $332  million in 2018, 2017 and 2016, 
respectively.


===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
123
NOTE Q. EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share 
calculations are based
Basic
912,048,072
932,828,295
955,422,530
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans
2,786,316
3,094,373
2,416,940
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares
1,481,326
1,462,957
874,626
Assuming dilution
916,315,714
937,385,625
958,714,097
Income from continuing operations
$8,723
$5,758
$11,881
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
5
(5)
(9)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated
$8,728
$5,753
$11,872
Income from continuing operations
$8,723
$5,758
$11,881
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares
(6)
(2)
0
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings  
per share is calculated
$8,718
$5,756 
$11,881 
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which basic  
and diluted earnings per share is calculated
5
(5 )
(9 )
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated
$8,722
$5,752 
$11,872 
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations
$  9.51
$  6.14
$  12.39
Discontinued operations
0.01
0.00
(0.01)
Total
$  9.52
$  6.14
$  12.38
Basic
Continuing operations
$  9.56
$  6.17
$  12.44
Discontinued operations
0.01
0.00
(0.01)
Total
$  9.57
$  6.17
$  12.43
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 576,776 common 
shares in 2018, 209,294 common shares in 2017 and 405,552 
common shares in 2016 were outstanding, but were not included 
in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the 
exercise price of the options was greater than the average market 
price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the 
effect would have been antidilutive.


===== PAGE 125 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
124
NOTE R. RENTAL EXPENSE AND LEASE COMMITMENTS
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories 
and fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, 
was $1,944 million in 2018, $1,821 million in 2017 and 
$1,508 million in 2016. Rental expense in agreements with 
rent holidays and scheduled rent increases is recorded on a 
straight-line basis over the lease term. Contingent rentals are 
included in the determination of rental expense as accruable. 
The table below depicts gross minimum rental commitments 
under noncancelable leases, amounts related to vacant space 
associated with workforce transformation, sublease income 
commitments and capital lease commitments. These amounts 
reflect activities primarily related to office space, data centers, 
equipment and vehicles.
($ in millions)
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Beyond 2023
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments  
(including vacant space below)
$1,581
$1,233
$914
$640
$445
$815
Vacant space
$     29
$     23
$  14   
$    9
$    5
$    8
Sublease income commitments
$     11
$       7
$    5
$    4
$    4
$    2
Capital lease commitments
$       3
$       3
$    3
$    3
$    2
$  28
NOTE S. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
The following table presents total stock-based compensation 
cost included in income from continuing operations.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Cost
$   82
$   91
$   88
Selling, general and 
administrative
361
384
401
Research, development 
and engineering
67
59 
55
Pre-tax stock-based  
compensation cost
510
534
544
Income tax benefits
(116)
(131)
(179)
Net stock-based  
compensation cost
$ 393
$ 403
$ 364
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested 
awards at December 31, 2018 and 2017 was $821 million and 
$851 million, respectively. The amount at December 31, 2018 
is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 
approximately 2.6 years.
Capitalized stock-based compensation cost was not material at 
December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016.
Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under 
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans 
(the “Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive 
Compensation and Management Resources Committee of the 
Board of Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under 
the Plans principally include restricted stock units, performance 
share units, stock options or any combination thereof.
 
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under 
the company’s existing Plans was 273 million at December 31, 
2018. In addition, certain incentive awards granted under 
previous plans, if and when those awards were canceled, could 
be reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 
million additional shares were considered authorized to be issued 
under the company’s existing Plans as of December 31, 2018. 
There were 100.0 million unused shares available to be granted 
under the Plans as of December 31, 2018.
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all 
awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards 
approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, 
the number of options or the value of the award, the exercise 
price or formula for determining the exercise price and the 
date of grant. All awards for senior management are approved 
by the Committee. All awards for employees other than senior 
management are approved by senior management pursuant to 
a series of delegations that were approved by the Committee, 
and the grants made pursuant to these delegations are reviewed 
periodically with the Committee. Awards that are given as part 
of annual total compensation for senior management and 
other employees are made on specific cycle dates scheduled 
in advance. With respect to awards given in connection with 
promotions or new hires, the company’s policy requires approval 
of such awards prior to the grant date, which is typically the date 
of the promotion or the date of hire.
Stock Awards
Stock awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock Units 
(RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or 
Performance Share Units (PSUs). 


===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
125
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016.
RSUs
2018
2017
2016
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$141 
8,555,263
$147 
8,899,092
$159 
7,527,341
RSUs granted
121
4,806,790
137
3,540,949
140
3,985,870
RSUs released
148
(2,579,962)
153
(3,032,531)
174
(1,860,660)
RSUs canceled/forfeited
139
(979,387)
147
(852,247)
158
(753,459)
Balance at December 31
$130
9,802,704
$141 
8,555,263
$147 
8,899,092
PSUs
2018
2017
2016
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted- 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$144
2,649,313
$155 
2,874,758
$173 
2,928,932
PSUs granted at target
130
909,140
137
824,875
140
990,336
Performance adjustments*
152
(328,120)
175
(623,245)
194
(387,457)
PSUs released
152
(666,244)
175
(293,236)
194
(419,759)
PSUs canceled/forfeited
135
(144,394)
144
(133,839)
174
(237,294)
Balance at December 31**
$136
2,419,695
$144 
2,649,313
$155 
2,874,758
*	 Represents the change in shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics were above or below specified targets.
**	Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares 
issued will depend on final performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the 
holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically 
over a one- to five-year period. For RSUs, dividend equivalents 
are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs is determined and fixed 
on the grant date based on the company’s stock price adjusted 
for the exclusion of dividend equivalents.
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at 
December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016 is the same as the period 
over which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, 
which is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted 
during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016 was 
$583 million, $484 million and $557 million, respectively. The 
total fair value of RSUs vested and released during the years 
ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016 was $381 million, 
$463 million and $323 million, respectively. As of December 31, 
2018, 2017 and 2016, there was $715 million, $763 million and 
$814 million, respectively, of unrecognized compensation cost 
related to non-vested RSUs. The company received no cash from 
employees as a result of employee vesting and release of RSUs 
for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016.
PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately 
received by the employee depends on the company’s 
performance against specified targets and typically vest over 
a three-year period. For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not 
paid. The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date, 
based on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of 
dividend equivalents, and assumes that performance targets will 
be achieved. Over the performance period, the number of shares 
of stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or downward 
based upon the probability of achievement of performance 
targets. The ultimate number of shares issued and the related 
compensation cost recognized as expense will be based on a 
comparison of the final performance metrics to the specified 
targets. The fair value of PSUs granted at target during the years 
ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016 was $118 million, 
$113 million and $138 million, respectively. Total fair value of 
PSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31, 
2018, 2017 and 2016 was $101 million, $51 million and $81 
million, respectively. 
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, 
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended 
December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016 were $117 million, $180 
million and $118 million, respectively.


===== PAGE 127 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
126
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016.
2018
2017
2016
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Balance at January 1
$140
1,500,000
$137
1,613,923
$  94 
479,774
Options granted
—
—
—
—
140
1,500,000
Options exercised
—
—
103
(106,132)
91
(361,088)
Options canceled/expired 
—
—
103
(7,791)
86
(4,763)
Balance at December 31
$140
1,500,000
$140
1,500,000
$137
1,613,923
Exercisable at December 31
$    —
—
$    —
—
$103
113,923
The shares under option at December 31, 2018 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding
Exercise Price Range
Weighted- 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value
Weighted-Average 
Remaining 
Contractual Life 
(in Years)
$129–$154
$140
1,500,000
$0
7.1
Stock Options
For the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, the company 
did not grant stock options. For the year ended December 31, 
2016, the company made one grant of 1.5 million premium-
priced stock options. The option award was granted with a 
three-year cliff vesting period and a 10-year contractual term. 
The award’s cost of $12 million is recognized ratably over the 
three-year vesting period. 
 
The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the 
date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key 
inputs and assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock 
options include the grant price of the award, the expected option 
term, volatility of the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the 
company’s dividend yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended 
to predict actual future events or the value ultimately realized by 
employees who receive equity awards, and subsequent events 
are not indicative of the reasonableness of the original estimates 
of fair value made by the company.
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
For the year ended December 31, 2018, no stock options were 
exercised. The total intrinsic value of options exercised during 
the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 was $7 million 
and $20 million, respectively. The total cash received from 
employees as a result of employee stock option exercises for the 
years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 was approximately 
$11 million and $33 million, respectively. In connection with 
these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the company for 
the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 were $2 million 
and $7 million, respectively.
 
The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily 
with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with 
treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2018 
and 2017 were approximately 1,341 million and 1,307 million 
shares, respectively.


===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
127
Acquisitions
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was an 
additional 0.2 million options outstanding at December 31, 2018, 
as a result of the company’s conversion of stock-based awards 
previously granted by the acquired entities. The weighted-
average exercise price of these awards was $39 per share.
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock 
Purchase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants 
to purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at 
a 5 percent discount off the average market price on the day 
of purchase through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of 
eligible compensation. Eligible compensation includes any 
compensation received by the employee during the year. The 
ESPP provides for offering periods during which shares may be 
purchased and continues as long as shares remain available 
under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the 
Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted 
from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock in one 
calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
Employees purchased 1.0 million, 1.0 million and 1.2 million 
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 
2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively. Cash dividends declared 
and paid by the company on its common stock also include cash 
dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP. 
Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can be 
reinvested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is 
considered outstanding and is included in the weighted-average 
outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted 
earnings per share.
In July 2014, the “2014 ESPP Reserve” became effective and 
25 million additional shares of authorized common stock were 
reserved and approved for issuance. The 2014 ESPP provides for 
semi-annual offerings commencing July 1, 2014, and continuing 
as long as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless 
terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
Approximately 19.8 million, 20.8 million and 21.8 million shares 
were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 
2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively. 
NOTE T. RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined 
contribution plans that cover eligible regular employees, a 
supplemental retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans primarily 
consisting of retiree medical and dental benefits for eligible 
retirees and dependents. 
U.S. Plans
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
IBM Personal Pension Plan 
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees 
hired prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined 
benefit pension benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP). 
The PPP has two plans, a tax qualified plan (Qualified PPP) and a 
non-tax qualified plan (Excess PPP). The Qualified PPP is funded 
by company contributions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is 
held for the sole benefit of participants and beneficiaries. The 
Excess PPP, which is unfunded, provides benefits in excess of 
IRS limitations for qualified plans.
Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using 
benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first 
method uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines 
benefits based on salary, years of service, mortality and other 
participant-specific factors. The second method is a cash 
balance formula that calculates benefits using a percentage of 
employees’ annual salary, as well as an interest crediting rate.
Benefit accruals under the IBM PPP ceased December 31, 2007 
for all participants. 
Beginning in 2019, substantially all the plan participants in the 
U.S. Qualified PPP are considered inactive. As required by U.S. 
GAAP, this will change the amortization period of unrecognized 
actuarial losses to the average remaining life expectancy of 
inactive plan participants, which is 18 years as of December 31, 
2018. As a result of this change, there will be a reduction to 2019 
amortization expense of approximately $900 million. There will 
be no impact to funded status, retiree benefit payments or funding 
requirements of the U.S. Qualified PPP due to this change.
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental 
Executive Retention Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan, 
which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives 
based on average earnings, years of service and age at 
termination of employment.
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 31, 
2007 for all participants. 
Defined Contribution Plans
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan 
U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to 
participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified 
defined contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal 
Revenue Code. Under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible 
employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions 
generally up to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those 
hired prior to January 1, 2005, and generally up to 5 percent 
of eligible compensation for those hired on or after January 1, 
2005. In addition, eligible employees generally receive automatic 
contributions from the company equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent of 
eligible compensation based on their eligibility to participate in 
the PPP as of December 31, 2007. Employees generally receive 
automatic contributions and matching contributions after the 
completion of one year of service.


===== PAGE 129 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
128
All contributions, including the company match, are made in 
cash and invested in accordance with participants’ investment 
elections. There are no minimum amounts that must be invested 
in company stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring 
amounts out of company stock to another investment choice, 
other than excessive trading rules applicable to such investments. 
Matching and automatic contributions are made once annually at 
the end of the year. In order to receive such contributions each 
year, a participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan 
year. However, matching and auto contributions may be made for 
certain types of separations that occur prior to December 15, 
including for example, if the participant has completed certain 
service and/or age requirements at separation. The company’s 
matching contributions vest immediately and participants are 
always fully vested in their own contributions. 
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
The IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess 401(k)) is an unfunded, 
nonqualified defined contribution plan. Employees whose eligible 
compensation is expected to exceed the IRS compensation limit 
for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the Excess 401(k). 
The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide benefits that 
would be provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if 
the compensation limits did not apply.
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping 
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. 
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional 
accounts in investments which mirror the primary investment 
options available under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in 
the Excess 401(k) are also eligible to receive company match 
and automatic contributions (at the same rate as under the 
401(k) Plus Plan) on eligible compensation deferred into the 
Excess 401(k) and on compensation earned in excess of the 
Internal Revenue Code pay limit once they have completed 
one year of service. Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k), 
including company contributions are recorded as liabilities 
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Matching 
and automatic contributions are made once annually at the end 
of the year. In order to receive such contributions each year, a 
participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year. 
However, matching and auto contributions may be made for 
certain types of separations that occur prior to December 15, 
including for example, if the participant has completed certain 
service and/or age requirements at separation. 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan 
The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan that provides medical and dental 
benefits to eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as 
well as life insurance for eligible U.S. retirees. Benefits provided 
vary based on plan design formulas and eligibility requirements. 
Under all the plan arrangements, there is a maximum cost to the 
company for these benefits.
Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are 
not eligible for company-subsidized nonpension postretirement 
benefits.
Non-U.S. Plans
Certain subsidiaries and branches outside the United States 
sponsor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that 
cover eligible regular employees. The company deposits funds 
under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities 
under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. 
Benefits under the defined benefit plans are typically based 
either on years of service and the employee’s compensation 
(generally during a fixed number of years immediately before 
retirement) or on annual credits. The range of assumptions 
that are used for the non-U.S. defined benefit plans reflect the 
different economic environments within the various countries.
In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries 
sponsor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide 
medical and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and 
eligible dependents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible 
non-U.S. retirees. However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered 
by local government sponsored and administered programs.


===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
129
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
Total
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
Defined benefit pension plans
$    542
$    237
$(334)
$1,284
$1,315
$1,039
$1,827
$1,552
$   705
Retention Plan
17
16
17
—
—
—
17
16
17
Total defined benefit pension  
plans (income)/cost
$    559
$    253
$(317)
$1,284
$1,315
$1,039
$1,843
$1,568
$   722
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and  
non-U.S. plans
$    588
$    616
$ 626
$   412
$   404
$   420
$1,000 
$1,020 
$1,046 
Excess 401(k)
24
26
24
—
—
—
24
26
24
Total defined contribution  
plans cost
$    612
$    643
$ 650
$   412
$   404
$   420
$1,024 
$1,046 
$1,070 
Nonpension postretirement  
benefit plans cost
$    147
$    180
$ 195
$     51
$     62
$     16
$   198
$   242
$   211
Total retirement-related  
benefits net periodic cost
$1,319
$1,076
$ 527
$1,747 
$1,781 
$1,475 
$3,066 
$2,857 
$2,003 
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement 
benefit plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations
Fair Value of Plan Assets
Funded Status*
At December 31:
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP
$46,145
$50,602
$48,213
$52,694
$   2,069
$   2,092
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP
$  1,395
$  1,532
$         —
$         —
$  (1,395)
$  (1,532)
Retention Plan
273
310
—
—
(273)
(310)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan
3,912
4,184
29
18
(3,882)
(4,165)
Total underfunded U.S. plans
$  5,579 
$  6,026
$       29 
$       18
$  (5,550)
$  (6,007)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans 
Qualified defined benefit pension plans**
$17,379 
$19,537 
$19,975 
$22,088 
$   2,597
$   2,551
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans
$17,379 
$19,537 
$19,975 
$22,088 
$   2,597
$   2,551
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans**
$22,139 
$23,046 
$16,783 
$18,711 
$  (5,356)
$  (4,336)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans
6,252
6,527
—
—
(6,252)
(6,527)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
704 
732 
65 
70 
(640)
(663)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans
$29,095 
$30,306 
$16,848 
$18,780 
$(12,248)
$(11,526)
Total overfunded plans
$63,524 
$70,139 
$68,190 
$74,782 
$   4,666
$   4,643
Total underfunded plans
$34,675 
$36,332 
$16,877 
$18,799 
$(17,798)
$(17,533)
*	 Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (liability) 
amounts as compensation and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
**	Non-U.S. qualified plans represent plans funded outside of the U.S. Non-U.S. non-qualified plans are unfunded.


===== PAGE 131 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
130
At December 31, 2018, the company’s qualified defined benefit 
pension plans worldwide were 99 percent funded compared to 
the benefit obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 104 percent 
funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the company’s 
defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 91 percent funded.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension  
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 133 represent financial 
information for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, 
excluding defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension 
plans under U.S. Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess 
PPP and the Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans 
and the nonpension postretirement benefit plans under non-
U.S. Plans consists of all plans sponsored by the company’s 
subsidiaries. The nonpension postretirement benefit plan under 
U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S. Nonpension Postretirement 
Benefit Plan.
The tables below present the components of net periodic 
(income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined 
contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
Service cost
$        —
$      —
$        —
$    413
$    410
$    420
Interest cost (1)
1,719
1,913
2,048
830
837
1,035
Expected return on plan assets (1)
(2,701)
(3,014)
(3,689)
(1,342)
(1,325)
(1,867)
Amortization of transition assets (1)
—
—
—
0
0
0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (1)
16
16
10
(83)
(97)
(106)
Recognized actuarial losses (1)
1,525
1,337
1,314
1,401
1,507
1,408
Curtailments and settlements (1)
—
—
—
11
19
22
Multi-employer plans
—
—
—
38
40
43
Other costs/(credits)*
—
—
—
16
(76)
84
Total net periodic (income)/cost
$    559
$   253
$   (317)
$ 1,284
$ 1,315
$ 1,039
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
Service cost
$  13
$  14
$  17
$  5 
$   6
$   5
Interest cost (1)
132
154
165
45
57
51
Expected return on plan assets (1)
0
0
0
(6)
(7)
(6)
Amortization of transition assets (1)
—
—
—
0
0
0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (1)
(7)
(7)
(7)
0
0
(5)
Recognized actuarial losses (1)
10
20
20
6
7
9
Curtailments and settlements (1)
—
—
—
0
0
(38)
Total net periodic cost
$147 
$180 
$195 
$51 
$ 62 
$ 16
(1)	These components of net periodic pension costs are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
*	 The non-U.S. plans amounts include a gain of $91 million in 2017 related to the IBM UK litigation and a retirement-related charge of $56 million 
related to the IBM Spain pension litigation for 2016.


===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
131
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31:
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
Prepaid pension assets
$ 2,069
$ 2,092
$   2,597
$   2,551
$        0
$        0
$     0
$     0
Current liabilities— 
compensation and benefits
(120)
(120)
(302)
(323)
(340)
(353)
(36)
(17)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement 
and nonpension postretirement 
benefit obligations
(1,548)
(1,722)
(11,306)
(10,541)
(3,542)
(3,812)
(605)
(646)
Funded status—net
$    401
$    250
$  (9,012)
$  (8,312)
$(3,882)
$(4,165)
$(640)
$(663)
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, 
excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
Change in benefit obligation 
Benefit obligation at January 1
$52,444
$52,218 
$49,111
$44,981 
$ 4,184
$ 4,470
$ 732
$ 692
Service cost
—
—
413
410
13
14
5
6
Interest cost
1,719
1,913
830
837
132
154
45
57
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
25
28
59
54
—
—
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
—
—
(27)
24
0
0
0
0
Actuarial losses/(gains)
(2,743)
1,895
(240)
520
(71)
(98)
43
(3)
Benefits paid from trust
(3,484)
(3,460)
(1,976)
(1,865)
(383)
(385)
(7)
(6)
Direct benefit payments
(124)
(123)
(390)
(384)
(22)
(24)
(31)
(30)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
(2,012)
4,657
—
—
(86)
18
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other
—
—
34
(96)
—
—
3
(1)
Benefit obligation at December 31
$47,812
$52,444 
$45,770
$49,111 
$ 3,912
$ 4,184
$ 705
$ 732
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $52,694
$51,405 
$40,798
$36,020 
$      18
$      26
$   70
$   71
Actual return on plan assets
(997)
4,749
(610)
2,583
1
0
12
6
Employer contributions
—
—
325
368
335
394
0
0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
—
—
(22)
(28)
0
0
0
0
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
25
28
59
54
0
—
Benefits paid from trust
(3,484)
(3,460)
(1,976)
(1,865)
(383)
(385)
(7)
(6)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
(1,754)
3,694
—
—
(10)
(1)
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other
—
—
(28)
(2)
0
(70)
0
(1)
Fair value of plan assets  
at December 31
$48,213
$52,694 
$36,758
$40,798 
$      29
$      18
$   65
$   70
Funded status at December 31
$     401
$     250
$ (9,012)
$ (8,312)
$(3,882)
$(4,165)
$(640)
$(663)
Accumulated benefit obligation*
$47,812
$52,444 
$45,161
$47,974
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
*	 Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 133 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
132
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in 
OCI and the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the 
retirement-related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
Net loss at January 1
$18,045
$19,222 
$18,275
$20,544 
$486
$605 
$145
$154 
Current period loss/(gain)
956
159
1,590
(740)
(72)
(99)
33
(2)
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
(11)
(22)
—
—
0
0
Amortization of net loss included in 
net periodic (income)/cost
(1,525)
(1,337)
(1,401)
(1,507)
(10)
(20)
(6)
(7)
Net loss at December 31
$17,476
$18,045 
$18,452
$18,275 
$405
$486 
$172
$145 
Prior service costs/(credits)  
at January 1
$       74
$       90
$      (90)
$    (188)
$  45
$  37
$    3
$    1
Current period prior service     
costs/(credits)
—
—
181
—
—
—
1
—
Curtailments, settlements  
and other
—
—
0
1
—
—
0
2
Amortization of prior service 
(costs)/credits included in net 
periodic (income)/cost
(16)
(16)
83
97
7
7
0
0
Prior service costs/(credits)  
at December 31
$       57
$       74
$     172
$      (90)
$  52
$  45
$    4
$    3
Transition (assets)/liabilities 
 at January 1
$        —
$         —
$         0
$         0
$    —
$    —
$    0
$    0
Amortization of transition  
assets/(liabilities) included in  
net periodic (income)/cost
—
—
—
0
—
—
0
0
Transition (assets)/liabilities  
at December 31
$         —
$         —
$         0
$         0
$    —
$    —
$    0
$    0
Total loss recognized in 
accumulated other 
comprehensive income/(loss)*
$17,533
$18,119 
$18,624
$18,184 
$457
$531
$176
$147
*	 See note L, “Equity Activity,” for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net 
periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.


===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
133
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2019.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit  
Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss
$560 
$1,261 
$2
$11
Prior service costs/(credits)
16
(26)
(2)
0
Transition (assets)/liabilities
—
—
—
—
On October 26, 2018, the High Court in London in the case of 
Lloyds Pension Group Trustees Limited v Lloyds Bank PLC, 
confirmed that the UK defined benefit pension plans are required 
to equalize pension benefits to take into account unequal 
guaranteed minimum pension benefits accrued during the period 
1990-1997. As a result of this court decision, IBM recorded an 
increase of $125 million to the PBO for the IBM UK defined 
benefit plan, which represents approximately 1 percent of the 
UK PBO. This amount was recorded as prior service cost in OCI 
for the year ended December 31, 2018.
On March 24, 2014, the Supreme Court of Spain issued a ruling 
against IBM Spain in litigation involving its defined benefit and 
defined contribution plans. During the fourth quarter of 2016, 
an arbitration ruling related to the defined contribution plan 
resulted in an additional charge of $56 million. For the year 
ended December 31, 2016, the company recorded pre-tax 
retirement-related obligations of $56 million in selling, general 
and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings. There were no pre-tax retirement-related obligations 
for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017. These 
obligations are reflected in “Non-U.S. Plans—Other costs/
(credits)” in the table on page 130. 
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued a ruling 
against IBM United Kingdom Limited and IBM United Kingdom 
Holdings Limited, both wholly owned subsidiaries of the company, 
in litigation involving one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a 
result of the ruling, the company recorded a pre-tax retirement-
related obligation of $162 million in the fourth quarter of 2012 in 
selling, general and administrative expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. As a result of the final Court of Appeal 
ruling received in August 2017, the company adjusted its obligation 
under the plan. This adjustment resulted in a gain of $91 million for 
the year ended December 31, 2017, which was recorded in selling, 
general and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings. This gain is reflected in “Non-U.S. Plans—Other costs/
(credits)” in the table on page 130. See note M, “Contingencies 
and Commitments” for additional information.
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net 
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations 
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years 
of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of 
which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan 
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates 
and mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, 
at a minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for 
retirement-related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
Weighted-average assumptions used  
to measure net periodic (income)/cost  
for the year ended December 31
Discount rate
3.40%
3.80%
4.00%
1.76%
1.80%
2.40%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets
5.25%
5.75%
7.00%
3.62%
3.77%
5.53%
Rate of compensation increase
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.41%
2.45%
2.40%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure 
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate
4.10%
3.40%
3.80%
1.85%
1.76%
1.80%
Rate of compensation increase
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.18%
2.41%
2.45%
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 135 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
134
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2018
2017
2016
2018
2017
2016
Weighted-average assumptions used  
to measure net periodic cost for the  
year ended December 31
Discount rate
3.30%
3.60%
3.70%
7.28%
8.26%
7.06%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets
N/A
N/A
N/A
8.91%
10.47%
9.95%
Weighted-average assumptions used to 
measure benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate
3.90%
3.30%
3.60%
7.48%
7.28%
8.26%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related 
benefit plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-
quality, fixed-income debt instruments at the measurement 
date. For the U.S. and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of 
high-quality corporate bonds is used to construct a yield curve. 
The cash flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation 
payments are then matched to the yield curve to derive the 
discount rates. In other non-U.S. countries, where the markets 
for high-quality long-term bonds are not generally as well 
developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used 
as a base, to which a credit spread is added to simulate corporate 
bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan, 
as the benchmark for developing the respective discount rates.
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the 
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/
cost and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions 
resulted in a decrease in 2018 net periodic income of $124 million, 
a decrease in 2017 net periodic income of $64 million and an 
increase in 2016 net periodic income of $103 million. The changes 
in the discount rate assumptions resulted in a decrease in the PBO 
of $3,239 million and an increase of $1,962 million for the years 
ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the 
changes in the discount rate assumptions had no material impact 
on net periodic cost for the years ended December 31, 2018, 
2017 and 2016 and resulted in a decrease in the APBO of $153 
million and an increase of $88 million at December 31, 2018 and 
2017, respectively.
For all of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, the 
change in the discount rate assumptions resulted in a decrease 
in the benefit obligation of approximately $4.0 billion at 
December 31, 2018 and an increase of approximately $2.5 billion 
at December 31, 2017.
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic 
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on 
plan assets based on the calculated market-related value of 
plan assets. Expected long-term returns on plan assets take 
into account long-term expectations for future returns and the 
investment policies and strategies as described on pages 135 
and 136. These rates of return are developed by the company 
and are tested for reasonableness against historical returns. 
The use of expected long-term returns on plan assets may 
result in recognized pension income that is greater or less than 
the actual returns of those plan assets in any given year. Over 
time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed to 
approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result 
in a pattern of income and cost recognition that more closely 
matches the pattern of the services provided by the employees. 
Differences between actual and expected returns are recognized 
as a component of net loss or gain in AOCI, which is amortized as 
a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives 
or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending on the plan, 
provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds provided by 
accounting standards. The market-related value of plan assets 
recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically 
over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line 
in net periodic (income)/cost.
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the expected long-term 
rate of return on plan assets for the years ended December 31, 
2018, 2017 and 2016 was 5.25 percent, 5.75 percent and 
7.0 percent, respectively. The change in the rate in 2018 resulted 
in a decrease in 2018 net periodic income of $256 million. For the 
year ended December 31, 2017, the change in the rate resulted 
in a decrease in net periodic income of $656 million. For the year 
ended December 31, 2016, the change in the rate resulted in a 
decrease in net periodic income of $268 million. For 2019, the 
projected long-term rate of return on plan assets is 5.25 percent. 


===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
135
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the 
company maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure 
timely payments are made. As a result, for the years ended 
December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, the expected long-term 
return on plan assets and the actual return on those assets were 
not material.
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the 
company, based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The 
rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined 
benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 
2007 for all participants. Mortality rate assumptions are 
based on life expectancy and death rates for different types of 
participants. Mortality rates are periodically updated based on 
actual experience. In the U.S., the Society of Actuaries released 
new mortality tables in 2014 and updated them in each of the 
years 2015 to 2018. The company utilized these tables in its plan 
remeasurements at December 31, 2018 and 2017. For the U.S. 
retirement-related plans, the change in mortality assumptions 
resulted in a decrease to the plan benefit obligations of $27 million 
and $345 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Interest Crediting Rate
Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using 
a cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula 
is an interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic 
(income)/cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for 
projecting the expected interest rate that participants will earn 
on the benefits that they are expected to receive in the following 
year and is based on the average from August to October of the 
one-year U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 2.3 percent 
for the year ended December 31, 2018 from 1.6 percent for the 
year ended December 31, 2017 resulted in a decrease in 2018 
net periodic income of $25 million. The change in the interest 
crediting rate to 1.6 percent for the year ended December 31, 
2017 from 1.3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2016 
resulted in a decrease in 2017 net periodic income of $14 million. 
The change in the interest crediting rate to 1.3 percent for the 
year ended December 31, 2016 from 1.1 percent for the year 
ended December 31, 2015 resulted in a decrease in 2016 net 
periodic income of $7 million.
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the 
company reviews external data and its own historical trends for 
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. 
However, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant 
effect on plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of 
the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants. 
The company assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 
2019 will be 6.25 percent. In addition, the company assumes 
that the same trend rate will decrease to 5 percent over the 
next five years. A one percentage point increase or decrease in 
the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would not have had a 
material effect on 2018, 2017 and 2016 net periodic cost or the 
benefit obligations as of December 31, 2018 and 2017.
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and 
measured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of 
valuations, these fair value measurements may not necessarily 
reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market 
transactions. 
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are 
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet 
its future obligations. The precise amount for which these 
obligations will be settled depends on future events, including the 
retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. 
The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based 
on the current economic environment and other pertinent factors 
described previously on pages 134 and 135. The Qualified PPP 
portfolio’s investment strategy balances the requirement to 
generate returns, using potentially higher yielding assets such 
as equity securities, with the need to control risk in the portfolio 
with less volatile assets, such as fixed-income securities. Risks 
include, among others, inflation, volatility in equity values and 
changes in interest rates that could cause the plan to become 
underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on contributions 
from the company. To mitigate any potential concentration risk, 
careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio among 
industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into account 
interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, 
currency and other factors that affect investment returns. During 
2016 and 2017, the company changed its investment strategy, 
modifying the target allocation primarily by reducing equity 
securities and increasing debt securities. These changes were 
designed to reduce the potential negative impact that equity 
markets might have on the funded status of the plan. There were 
no significant changes to investment strategy made in 2018 or 
planned for 2019. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation 
is 12 percent equity securities, 80 percent fixed-income 
securities, 4 percent real estate and 4 percent other investments. 
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and 
investment professionals who are employees of the company. 
They are bound by investment mandates determined by the 
company’s management and are measured against specific 
benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given, 
but not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer 
concentration, investment style and reliance on particular active 
and passive investment strategies.
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $4,295 million 
of the Qualified PPP portfolio as of December 31, 2018 invested 
in private market assets consisting of private equities and private 
real estate investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded 
securities. In addition, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $1,500 
million in commitments for future investments in private markets 
to be made over a number of years. These commitments are 
expected to be funded from plan assets.


===== PAGE 137 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
136
Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment 
objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management 
strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are 
fixed income management, including duration, interest rate 
management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to 
manage currency strategies.
Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to 
those described previously, subject to local regulations. The 
weighted-average target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 
24 percent equity securities, 60 percent fixed-income securities, 
4 percent real estate and 12 percent other investments, which is 
consistent with the allocation decisions made by the company’s 
management. In some countries, a higher percentage allocation 
to fixed income is required to manage solvency and funding 
risks. In others, the responsibility for managing the investments 
typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 percent of 
members elected by employees and retirees. This can result 
in slight differences compared with the strategies previously 
described. Generally, these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid 
assets and their use of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan 
and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management, 
credit exposure and alternative investment strategies.
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans 
are underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company 
maintains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure 
timely benefit payments. 
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 
2018. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (1)
$1,538
$        —
$    —
$  1,538
$2,333
$         0
$      0
$  2,333
Equity mutual funds (2) 
65
—
—
65
18
5
—
23
Fixed income
Government and related (3)
—
19,661
—
19,661
20
8,951
2
8,973
Corporate bonds (4)
—
15,849
359
16,208
—
1,865
0
1,865
Mortgage and asset-backed 
securities
—
635
4
640
—
6
—
6
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 
421
—
—
421
11
—
—
11
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
1,308
—
1,308
Cash and short-term investments (6)
55
1,020
—
1,075
322
431
—
753
Real estate 
—
—
—
—
—
—
339
339
Derivatives (7)
3
(1)
—
2
24
606
—
630
Other mutual funds (8) 
—
—
—
—
24
—
—
24
Subtotal 
2,081
37,164
363
39,608
2,753
13,172
341
16,266
Investments measured at net  
asset value using the NAV  
practical expedient (9)
—
—
—
8,835
—
—
—
20,525
Other (10)
—
—
—
(230)
—
—
—
(32)
Fair value of plan assets
$2,081
$37,164
$363
$48,213
$2,753
$13,172
$341
$36,758
(1)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $2 million, representing 0.004 percent of the U.S. Plan 
assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $10 million, representing 0.03 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4)	The U.S. Plan does not include any IBM corporate bonds. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $3 million representing 0.007 percent of 
the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(5)	Invests predominantly in fixed-income securities.
(6)	Includes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(7)	Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(8)	Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(9)	Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical 	expedient, including commingled 
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate 	partnerships.
(10)	Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets. 


===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
137
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (1)
$2,215 
$         0
$    —
$  2,215 
$3,508 
$         0
$    —
$  3,508
Equity mutual funds (2) 
108
—
—
108
24
—
—
24
Fixed income
Government and related (3)
—
19,762
—
19,762
—
10,103
8
10,111
Corporate bonds (4)
—
17,864
372
18,236
—
2,000
—
2,000
Mortgage and asset-backed 
securities
—
619
4
623
—
5
—
5
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 
338
—
—
338
86
—
—
86
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
1,366
—
1,366
Cash and short-term investments (6)
100
1,903
—
2,004
221
606
—
827
Real estate 
—
—
—
—
—
—
356
356
Derivatives (7)
21
(4)
—
17
20
744
—
764
Other mutual funds (8) 
—
—
—
—
60
—
—
60
Subtotal
2,782
40,144
376
43,302
3,918
14,824
365
19,107
Investments measured at net  
asset value using the NAV  
practical expedient (9)
—
—
—
9,537
—
—
—
21,744
Other (10)
—
—
—
(145)
—
—
—
(52)
Fair value of plan assets
$2,782 
$40,144 
$376 
$52,694 
$3,918 
$14,824 
$365 
$40,798 
(1)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $14 million, representing 0.03 percent of the U.S. Plan 
assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $7 million, representing 0.02 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4)	The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $1 million, representing 0.002 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate 
bonds of $1 million representing 0.002 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(5)	Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(6)	Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(7)	Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(8)	Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities. 
(9)	 Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as 	a practical expedient, including commingled 
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate 	partnerships. 
(10)	Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $29 
million were invested primarily in cash equivalents, categorized 
as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan assets of $65 million, primarily in 
Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were 
invested primarily in government and related fixed-income 
securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the 
fair value hierarchy.
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit 
pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at 
December 31, 2017. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP 
and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the 
company’s subsidiaries.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of 
$18 million were invested in cash equivalents, categorized as 
Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan assets of $70 million, primarily in 
Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were 
invested primarily in government and related fixed-income 
securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the 
fair value hierarchy.


===== PAGE 139 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
138
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 
2018 and 2017 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Corporate 
Bonds
Mortgage and 
Asset-Backed 
Securities
Total
Balance at January 1, 2018
$372
$4
$376
Return on assets held at end of year
(23)
0
(23)
Return on assets sold during the year
0
0
0
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
10
0
10
Transfers, net
—
0
0
Balance at December 31, 2018
$359
$4
$363
($ in millions)
Corporate 
Bonds
Mortgage and 
Asset-Backed 
Securities
Total
Balance at January 1, 2017
$101
$5
$106
Return on assets held at end of year
12
0
11
Return on assets sold during the year
1
0
1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
259
(1)
258
Balance at December 31, 2017
$372
$4
$376
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 
2018 and 2017 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
  Government and 
Related
Private Real 
Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2018
$ 8
$356
$365
Return on assets held at end of year
0
8
8
Return on assets sold during the year
(1)
(2)
(2)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
(3)
(3)
(6)
Transfers, net
(2)
—
(2)
Foreign exchange impact
0
(21)
(21)
Balance at December 31, 2018
 
$ 2
$339
$341


===== PAGE 140 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
139
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
 Private Real 
Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2017
$16
$ 1
$294
$310
Return on assets held at end of year
2
0
24
26
Return on assets sold during the year
(3)
0
(1)
(4)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
(2)
0
9
7
Transfers, net
(6)
0
—
(6)
Foreign exchange impact
2
0
30
31
Balance at December 31, 2017 
$  8
$—
$356
$365
Valuation Techniques
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used 
to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in 
valuation techniques during 2018 and 2017.
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the 
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM 
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New 
York Stock Exchange. Mutual funds are typically valued based 
on quoted market prices. These assets are generally classified 
as Level 1.
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated 
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar 
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally 
classified as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing 
price reported on the major market on which the individual 
securities are traded.
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their 
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair 
value. Short-term investments represent securities with original 
maturities of one year or less. These assets are classified as 
Level 1 or Level 2.
Real estate valuations require significant judgment due to the 
absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity 
and the long-term nature of such assets. These assets are initially 
valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing available 
and relevant market data, including appraisals, to determine 
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These 
assets are classified as Level 3.
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price 
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are 
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close 
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using 
pricing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, 
for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility 
and foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 
or Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices.
Certain investments are measured at fair value using the net 
asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical 
expedient. These investments, which include commingled funds, 
hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships, are 
typically valued using the NAV provided by the administrator of 
the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the 
value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities 
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding.
Contributions
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for 
pensions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth 
in applicable employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From 
time to time, the company contributes additional amounts as it 
deems appropriate.
The company contributed $111 million in cash and $213 million in 
U.S. Treasury securities to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans 
as well as $38 million in cash to multi-employer plans for the year 
ended December 31, 2018. For the year ended December 31, 
2017, the company contributed $192 million in cash and $176 
million in U.S. Treasury securities to non-U.S. defined benefit 
pension plans as well as $40 million in cash to multi-employer 
plans. The contribution of U.S. Treasury securities is considered 
a non-cash transaction in the Consolidated Statement of Cash 
Flows. The cash contributions to multi-employer plans represent 
the annual cost included in net periodic (income)/cost recognized 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company’s 
participation in multi-employer plans has no material impact on 
the company’s financial statements.
In 2019, the company is not legally required to make any 
contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However, 
depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company 
may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified 
PPP during the year.
In 2019, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S. 
defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately 
$400 million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined 
benefit pension plans in Japan, Spain and Belgium. This amount 
generally represents legally mandated minimum contributions. 


===== PAGE 141 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
140
Financial market performance in 2019 could increase the legally 
mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which 
require monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. 
The company could also elect to contribute more than the legally 
mandated amount based on market conditions or other factors.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company contributed $1.0 billion in cash to the defined 
contribution plans during each of the years ended December 31, 
2018 and 2017. In 2019, the company estimates cash 
contributions to the defined contribution plans to be approximately 
$1.0 billion.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The company contributed $385 million in U.S. Treasury securities 
to the nonpension postretirement and active employee medical 
trusts for the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to $394 
million during the year ended December 31, 2017. In 2017, excess 
cash in the postretirement plan of $70 million was transferred 
to the active employee medical trust. The contribution of U.S. 
Treasury securities is considered a non-cash transaction in the 
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments 
to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments 
have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to 
measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2018 and include 
benefits attributable to estimated future compensation 
increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Qualified 
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Nonqualified 
U.S. Plans 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2019
$  3,521
$122
$1,862
$   336
$  5,841
2020
3,537
123
1,874
343
5,877
2021
3,529
123
1,876
397
5,924
2022
3,489
122
1,911
414
5,937
2023
3,440
121
1,922
432
5,915
2024–2028
16,237
574
9,514
2,293
28,619
The 2019 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension 
plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets 
(underfunded plans) represent a component of compensation 
and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments 
to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These 
payments have been estimated based on the same assumptions 
used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2018.
($ in millions)
 
 U.S. Plan 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2019
$   377
$  7
$  33
$   416
2020
388
7
34
429
2021
397
7
36
440
2022
394
7
37
439
2023
377
7
39
423
2024–2028
1,587
41
218
1,846
The 2019 expected benefit payments to nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the 
respective plan assets represent a component of compensation 
and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position.
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit 
pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in 
excess of plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the 
funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, 
see the table on page 131.


===== PAGE 142 =====
141
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
2018
2017
At December 31:
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets
$30,059 
$16,783
$31,416
$18,711
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets
29,312
16,522
27,751
15,607
Plans with assets in excess of PBO
63,524
68,190
70,139
74,782
NOTE U. SEGMENT INFORMATION
The company’s major operations consist of five business 
segments: Cognitive Solutions, Global Business Services, 
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, Systems and Global 
Financing. The segments represent components of the company 
for which separate financial information is available that is utilized 
on a regular basis by the chief operating decision maker (the chief 
executive officer) in determining how to allocate resources and 
evaluate performance. The segments are determined based 
on several factors, including client base, homogeneity of 
products, technology, delivery channels and similar economic 
characteristics.
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions 
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-
length, market-based transfer price. Systems that are used 
by Technology Services & Cloud Platforms in outsourcing 
engagements are primarily sourced internally from the Systems 
segment and software is sourced from various segments. 
Software used by Technology Services & Cloud Platforms on 
external engagements is sourced internally through Cognitive 
Solutions and the Systems segments. For providing IT 
services that are used internally, Technology Services & Cloud 
Platforms and Global Business Services recover cost, as well 
as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-length 
value of providing the services. They enter into arm’s-length 
loans at prices equivalent to market rates with Global Financing 
to facilitate the acquisition of equipment and software used 
in services engagements. All internal transaction prices are 
reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
 
The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations 
to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As 
a result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of 
the segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, 
certain marketing functions and support functions such as 
Accounting, Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re­sources 
and Billing and Collections. Where practical, shared expenses 
are allocated based on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., 
headcount. When a clear and measurable driver cannot be 
identified, shared expenses are allocated on a financial basis 
that is consistent with the company’s management system, e.g., 
advertising expense is allocated based on the gross profits of the 
segments. A portion of the shared expenses, which are recorded 
in net income, are not allocated to the segments. These expenses 
are associated with the elimination of internal transactions and 
other miscellaneous items.
The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations 
of the company’s segments consistent with the management and 
measurement system utilized within the company. Performance 
measurement is based on pre-tax income from continuing 
operations. These results are used, in part, by the chief operating 
decision maker, both in evaluating the performance of, and in 
allocating resources to, each of the segments. 


===== PAGE 143 =====
142
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
 Cognitive 
Solutions
Global 
Business 
Services
Technology 
Services & 
Cloud 
Platforms
Systems
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments
2018
External revenue
$18,481 
$16,817 
$34,462 
$8,034
$1,590 
$79,383 
Internal revenue
2,715
326
795
815
1,610
6,261
Total revenue
$21,197 
$17,143 
$35,257 
$8,848 
$3,200 
$85,644 
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 
$  7,154
$  1,676
$  3,786
$   904
$1,361 
$14,881
Revenue year-to-year change
0.5%
2.6%
0.9%
(1.1)%
1.0%
0.9%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
5.3%
23.0%
(11.7)%
(19.9)%
6.5%
0.2%
Pre-tax income margin
33.8%
9.8%
10.7%
10.2%
42.5%
17.4%
2017
External revenue
$18,453 
$16,348 
$34,277 
$8,194
$1,696 
$78,968 
Internal revenue
2,647
363
657
750
1,471
5,889
Total revenue
$21,100 
$16,711 
$34,934 
$8,945 
$3,168 
$84,857 
Pre-tax income from continuing operations* 
$  6,795
$  1,362
$  4,286
$1,128
$1,278 
$14,849
Revenue year-to-year change
1.4%
(2.3)%
(3.1)%
5.7%
(9.3)%
(1.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change*
7.4%
(19.0)%
(7.7)%
21.9%
(22.8)%
(2.5)%
Pre-tax income margin*
32.2%
8.2%
12.3%
12.6%
40.3%
17.5%
2016
External revenue
$18,187 
$16,700 
$35,337 
$7,714
$1,692 
$79,630 
Internal revenue
2,630
409
715
750
1,802
6,307
Total revenue
$20,817 
$17,109 
$36,052 
$8,464 
$3,494 
$85,936 
Pre-tax income from continuing operations* 
$  6,325
$  1,683
$  4,643
$   925
$1,654 
$15,230
Revenue year-to-year change
3.8%
(3.1)%
0.6%
(18.0)%
(22.0)%
(2.7)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change*
(12.5)%
(34.4)%
(17.4)%
(46.1)%
(30.0)%
(21.9)%
Pre-tax income margin*
30.4%
9.8%
12.9%
10.9%
47.3%
17.7%
* Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.


===== PAGE 144 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
143
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Revenue
Total reportable segments
$85,644
$84,857 
$85,936 
Other revenue
207
171
289
Elimination of internal 
transactions
(6,261)
(5,889)
(6,307)
Total IBM consolidated 
revenue
$79,591
$79,139
$79,919
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Pre-tax income from 
continuing operations
Total reportable segments
$14,881
$14,849 *
$15,230 *
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(809)
(945)
(998)
Acquisition-related charges
(16)
(52)
(5)
Non-operating retirement- 
related (costs)/income
(1,572)
(1,341)*
(448)*
Elimination of internal 
transactions
(758)
(726)
(1,160)
Unallocated corporate 
amounts
(385)
(385)
(290)
Total pre-tax income from  
continuing operations
$11,342
$11,400 
$12,330 
*  Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net 	
	 benefit cost.
Immaterial Items
Investment in Equity Alliances and  
Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and 
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the 
segments did not have a material effect on the financial position 
or the financial results of the segments. 
Segment Assets and Other Items
Cognitive Solutions assets are mainly goodwill, acquired intangible 
assets and accounts receivable. Global Business Services assets 
are primarily goodwill and accounts receivable. Technology 
Services & Cloud Platforms assets are primarily goodwill, plant, 
property and equipment including the assets associated with the 
outsourcing business, deferred costs and accounts receivable. 
Systems assets are primarily goodwill, manufacturing inventory, 
and plant, property and equipment. Global Financing assets are 
primarily financing receivables, cash and marketable securities, 
and fixed assets under operating leases.
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and 
equipment, several segments may share plant, property and 
equipment assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership 
of the assets is assigned to one segment and is not allocated 
to each user segment. This is consistent with the company’s 
management system and is reflected accordingly in the table on 
page 144. In those cases, there will not be a precise correlation 
between segment pre-tax income and segment assets.
Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment 
are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be 
consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’ 
pre-tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax 
income reflect occupancy charges from the landlord segment 
and are not specifically identified by the management reporting 
system. Capital expenditures that are reported by each segment 
also are consistent with the landlord ownership basis of 
asset assignment.
Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest 
expense reflect the interest income and interest expense 
associated with the Global Financing business, including the 
intercompany financing activities discussed on pages 25 and 26, 
as well as the income from investment in cash and marketable 
securities. The explanation of the difference between cost of 
financing and interest expense for segment presentation versus 
presentation in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is 
included on page 39 of the Management Discussion.


===== PAGE 145 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
144
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
  
Cognitive 
Solutions
Global 
Business 
Services
Technology 
Services & 
Cloud 
Platforms
  
Systems
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments
2018
Assets
$24,244
$8,404
$24,624
$4,030
$41,320
$102,622
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
987
102
2,501
315
229
4,135
Capital expenditures/investments  
in intangibles
363
57
2,678
241
274
3,612
Interest income
—
—
—
—
1,647
1,647
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
515
515
2017
Assets**
$24,828
$8,713
$24,619
$3,898
$41,096
$103,153
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,121
101
2,359
341
267
4,190
Capital expenditures/investments  
in intangibles
373
50
2,290
189
364
3,265
Interest income
—
—
—
—
1,527
1,527
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
381
381
2016
Assets**
$25,514
$8,627
$24,085
$3,812
$36,492
$  98,530
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,228
104
2,224
375
317
4,248
Capital expenditures/investments  
in intangibles
495
55
2,382
453
380
3,764
Interest income
—
—
—
—
1,547
1,547
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
371
371
*	 Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of intangible assets.
**	Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash.


===== PAGE 146 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
145
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Assets
Total reportable segments
$102,622
$103,153* $  98,530*
Elimination of internal 
transactions
(7,143)
(6,272)
(5,670)
Unallocated amounts
Cash and marketable 
securities
10,393
10,162*
6,999*
Notes and accounts 
receivable
1,597
2,554
2,660
Deferred tax assets
5,089
4,746
5,078
Plant, other property  
and equipment
2,463
2,659
2,656
Pension assets
4,666
4,643
3,034
Other
3,695
3,712*
4,183*
Total IBM consolidated 
assets
$123,382
$125,356 
$117,470 
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on restricted cash. 
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s 
total revenue in 2018, 2017 or 2016.
Geographic Information 
The following provides information for those countries that are 
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Revenue*
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
United States
$29,078
$29,759 
$30,194 
Japan
  8,489
  8,239
  8,339
Other countries
42,024
41,141
41,386
Total IBM consolidated 
revenue
$79,591
$79,139 
$79,919 
*	 Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client. 
Plant and Other Property—Net
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2018
2017
2016
United States
$  4,585
$  4,670
$  4,701
Other countries
5,774
5,985
5,607
Total
$10,359
$10,655 
$10,308 


===== PAGE 147 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
146
Revenue by Classes of Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar 
classes of products or services within the company’s reportable 
segments. Client solutions often include IBM software and 
systems and other suppliers’ products if the client solution 
requires it. For each of the segments that include services, 
Software-as-a-Service, consulting, education, training and other 
product-related services are included as Services. For each of 
these segments, Software includes product license charges and 
ongoing subscriptions. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
Cognitive Solutions
Software
$13,667
$13,598 
$13,969 
Services
4,708
4,752
4,111
Systems
106
103
107
Global Business Services
Services
$16,460
$16,004 
$16,399 
Software
151
179
179
Systems
206
165
121
Technology Services & 
Cloud Platforms
Services
$24,145
$23,629 
$24,311 
Maintenance
5,484
5,783
5,862
Software
3,713
3,610
3,818
Systems
1,119
1,254
1,346
Systems
Servers
$  3,996
$  3,993 
$  3,567 
Storage
2,114
2,243
2,083
Software
1,498
1,520
1,586
Services
425
439
478
Global Financing
Financing
$  1,223
$  1,167
$  1,231
Used equipment sales
366
530
461
NOTE V. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On January 29, 2019, the company announced that the Board of 
Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.57 per common 
share. The dividend is payable March 9, 2019 to shareholders of 
record on February 8, 2019.
On January 31, 2019, the company issued $5.7 billion of Euro 
bonds as follows: $2.0 billion of 4-year fixed-rate bonds with a 
0.375 coupon, $1.1 billion of 6-year fixed-rate bonds with a 0.875 
coupon, $1.1 billion of 8-year fixed-rate bonds with a 1.25 coupon 
and $1.4 billion of 12-year fixed-rate bonds with a 1.75 coupon.


===== PAGE 148 =====
147
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
Revenue
$  79,591
$  79,139
$  79,919
$  81,741
$  92,793
Income from continuing operations
$    8,723
$    5,758
$  11,881
$  13,364
$  15,751
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
$           5
$          (5)
$          (9)
$      (174)
$   (3,729)
Net income
$    8,728
$    5,753
$  11,872
$  13,190
$  12,022
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  12,657
$  12,807**
$  12,880**
$  14,519**
$  16,534**
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations
$      9.51
$      6.14
$    12.39
$    13.60
$    15.59
Discontinued operations
$      0.01
$      0.00
$     (0.01)
$     (0.18)
$     (3.69)
Total
$      9.52
$      6.14
$    12.38
$    13.42
$    11.90
Basic:
Continuing operations
$      9.56
$      6.17
$    12.44
$    13.66
$    15.68
Discontinued operations
$      0.01
$      0.00
$     (0.01)
$     (0.18)
$     (3.71)
Total
$      9.57
$      6.17
$    12.43
$    13.48
$    11.97
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    13.81
$    13.66**
$    13.44**
$    14.77**
$    16.37**
Cash dividends paid on common stock
$    5,666 
$    5,506
$    5,256
$    4,897
$    4,265
Investment in property, plant and equipment
$    3,395 
$    3,229
$    3,567
$    3,579
$    3,740
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity
48.0%
31.1%
74.0%
101.1%
72.5%
At December 31:
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
Total assets
$123,382 
$125,356 
$117,470 
$110,495 
$117,271 
Net investment in property, plant and equipment
$  10,792
$  11,116
$  10,830
$  10,727
$  10,771
Working capital
$  10,918
$  12,373
$    7,613
$    8,235
$    7,797
Total debt
$  45,812
$  46,824
$  42,169
$  39,890
$  40,722
Total equity
$  16,929
$  17,725
$  18,392
$  14,424
$  12,014
*	 Refer to the table below for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2015 and 2014. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 41 and 
58 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2018, 2017 and 2016.
**	Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.
GAAP Reconciliation
The table below provides a reconciliation of the company’s income and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations as 
reported under GAAP to its operating earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating 
(non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the 
“Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on pages 18 and 19 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
GAAP
Acquisition- 
Related 
Adjustments
Retirement- 
Related 
Adjustments*
Operating 
(non-GAAP)*
2015
Income from continuing operations
$13,364
$ 562
$ 593
$14,519
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$  13.60
$0.57
$0.60
$  14.77
2014
 
Income from continuing operations
$15,751
$ 670
$ 112
$16,534
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$  15.59
$0.67
$0.11
$  16.37
*	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.


===== PAGE 149 =====
148
Selected Quarterly Data 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2018
First 
Quarter
Second 
Quarter
Third 
Quarter
Fourth 
Quarter
Full Year
Revenue
$19,072 
$20,003 
$18,756 
$21,760
$79,591
Gross profit
$  8,247 
$  9,199 
$  8,803 
$10,687
$36,936
Income from continuing operations
$  1,675
$  2,402
$  2,692
$  1,954
$  8,723
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
$         4
$         1
$         2
$        (2)
$         5
Net income 
$  1,679
$  2,404
$  2,694
$  1,951
$  8,728
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  2,272
$  2,834
$  3,134
$  4,417
$12,657
Earnings per share of common stock—                     
continuing operations**
Assuming dilution
$    1.81
$    2.61
$    2.94
$    2.15
$    9.51
Basic
$    1.82
$    2.63
$    2.95
$    2.17
$    9.56
Earnings per share of common stock—total**
Assuming dilution
$    1.81
$    2.61
$    2.94
$    2.15
$    9.52
Basic
$    1.82
$    2.63
$    2.95
$    2.17
$    9.57
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    2.45
$    3.08
$    3.42
$    4.87
$  13.81
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2017
First 
Quarter
Second 
Quarter
Third 
Quarter
Fourth 
Quarter
Full Year
Revenue
$18,155 
$19,289 
$19,153 
$22,543
$79,139
Gross profit
$  7,944 +
$  8,968 +
$  8,981 +
$11,049+
$36,943+
Income/(loss) from continuing operations
$  1,753
$  2,332
$  2,726
$ (1,053)
$  5,758
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
$        (3)
$        (1)
$         0
$        (1)
$        (5)
Net income/(loss)
$  1,750
$  2,331
$  2,726
$ (1,054)
$  5,753
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  2,224+
$  2,760+
$  3,045+
$  4,777+
$12,807+
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock— 
continuing operations**
Assuming dilution
$    1.85
$    2.48
$    2.92
$   (1.14)
$    6.14
Basic
$    1.86
$    2.49
$    2.93
$   (1.14)
$    6.17
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock—total**
Assuming dilution
$    1.85
$    2.48
$    2.92
$   (1.14)
$    6.14
Basic
$    1.86
$    2.49
$    2.93
$   (1.14)
$    6.17
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    2.35+
$    2.94+
$    3.26+
$    5.14+
$  13.66+
*	 Refer to page 73 of the company’s first-quarter 2018 Form 10-Q filed on April 24, 2018, page 89 of the company’s second-quarter 2018 Form 10-Q 
filed on July 31, 2018, page 91 of the company’s third-quarter 2018 Form 10-Q filed on October 30, 2018, and page 47 under the heading “GAAP 
Reconciliation” for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the quarterly periods of 2018 and 2017. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” 
on page 41 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year 2018 and 2017.
**	Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for 
the full year is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not 
equal the full-year EPS.
+	 Recast to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on presentation of net benefit cost.


===== PAGE 150 =====
149
Performance Graphs 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF FIVE- AND TEN-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM,  
S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEX 
The following graphs compare the five- and ten-year cumulative 
total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable 
cumulative returns of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. 
Due to the fact that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 
Stock Index, the SEC’s rules require the use of that index for 
the required five-year graph. Under those rules, the second 
index used for comparison may be a published industry or 
line-of-business index. The S&P Information Technology Index 
is such an index. IBM is also included in this index.
Each graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial 
year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested 
on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons 
assume that all dividends are reinvested.
Five-Year
(U.S. Dollar)
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
  IBM Common Stock
$100.00
$  87.61 
$  77.61
$  97.16
$  93.29
$  72.26
  S & P 500 Index
100.00
113.69
115.26
129.05
157.22
150.33
  S & P Information Technology Index
100.00
120.12
127.23
144.85
201.10
200.52
Ten-Year
(U.S. Dollar)
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
  IBM Common Stock
$100.00 $158.61 $181.26 $230.96 $244.67 $244.22 $213.95 $189.54 $237.28 $227.83 $176.48
  S & P 500 Index
100.00
126.46
145.51
148.59
172.37
228.19
259.43
263.02
294.47
358.76
343.03
  S & P Information 
Technology Index
100.00
161.72
178.20
182.50
209.55
269.13
323.26
342.41
389.84
541.22
539.66
Five-Year
Ten-Year
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
13
14
15
16
17
18
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
08
14
10
11
12
13
09
15
16
17
18


===== PAGE 151 =====
150
Stockholder Information  
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services
Stockholders with questions about their accounts  
should contact:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 505005, 
Louisville, Kentucky 40233-5005,  (888) IBM-6700.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada  
and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, 
N.A. via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a 
telecommunications device (TDD) can communicate directly 
with Computershare Trust Company, N.A., by calling (800) 
490-1493. Stockholders residing outside the United States, 
Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
IBM on the Internet
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found online at 
www.ibm.com. Financial results, news on IBM products, 
services and other activities can also be found at that website.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly 
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any 
other filings required by the SEC.
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com/investor) contains a significant 
amount of information about IBM, including the company’s 
annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, 
current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those 
reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) 
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 as soon as reasonably 
practicable after such material is electronically filed with or 
furnished to the SEC. These materials are available free of 
charge on or through IBM’s website.
The SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains 
reports, proxy and information statements, and other information 
regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC.
Computershare Investment Plan (CIP) 
(formerly IBM Investor Services Program)
The Computershare Investment Plan brochure outlines a 
number of services provided for IBM stockholders and potential 
IBM investors, including the reinvestment of dividends,  
direct purchase and the deposit of IBM stock certificates for 
safekeeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of the brochure. 
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and 
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder 
Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk,  
New York 10504.
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange 
and the Chicago Stock Exchange under the symbol “IBM”.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of 
the Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the 
meeting by calling (914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to 
infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by writing to IBM Stockholder Relations, 
New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
Annual Meeting
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on 
Tuesday, April 30, 2019, at 10 a.m. at the Charleston Area 
Convention Center, North Charleston, South Carolina.
Literature for IBM Stockholders
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without 
charge from:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 505005, 
Louisville, Kentucky 40233-5005  (888) IBM-6700.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and 
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly 
reports on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s 
business. The 10-K report is released by the end of February; 
10-Q reports are released by early May, August and November.
An audio recording of the 2018 Annual Report will be available 
for sight-impaired stockholders in June 2019.
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s 
values and its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, 
including its innovative strategies to transform communities 
through global citizenship. Highlights from the Corporate 
Responsibility Report are available online at www.ibm.com/
responsibility/report. The full Corporate Responsibility Report 
is available in printed form by downloading the report at  
www.ibm.com/responsibility/report.
General Information
Stockholders of record can receive account information and 
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder 
accounts online at www.ibm.com/investor. Stockholders of 
record can also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports 
and Proxy Statements online through this site.
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the 
continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside 
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.


===== PAGE 152 =====
151
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Simon J. Beaumont
Vice President
Tax and Treasurer
Michelle H. Browdy
Senior Vice President
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, 
and General Counsel
Erich Clementi**
Senior Vice President
Robert F. Del Bene
Vice President and Controller
Mark Foster
Senior Vice President
Global Business Services
Diane J. Gherson
Senior Vice President and  
Chief Human Resources Officer
John Granger
Senior Vice President
Cloud Application Innovation
Martin Jetter
Senior Vice President
Europe
James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President and  
Chief Financial Officer
Finance and Operations
John E. Kelly III
Executive Vice President 
Kenneth M. Keverian
Senior Vice President
Corporate Strategy
Arvind Krishna
Senior Vice President
Cloud and Cognitive Software
Robert W. Lord
Senior Vice President
Cognitive Applications
Christina M. Montgomery
Vice President
Assistant General Counsel  
and Secretary
Michelle Peluso
Senior Vice President and  
Chief Marketing Officer
Digital Sales and Marketing
Robert J. Picciano
Senior Vice President
Cognitive Systems
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer
Thomas W. Rosamilia
Senior Vice President
Systems
Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President
Global Markets, Global Financing,  
Marketing and Communications
Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President
Industry Platforms and  
Global Industries
Juan A. Zufiria Zatarain
Senior Vice President
Global Technology Services
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Michael L. Eskew
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer
United Parcel Service, Inc.
David N. Farr
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Emerson Electric Co.
Alex Gorsky
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Johnson & Johnson
Michelle J. Howard
Retired Admiral
United States Navy
Shirley Ann Jackson
President
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Andrew N. Liveris
Retired Executive Chairman
DowDuPont Inc.
Retired Chairman and 
Chief Executive Officer 
The Dow Chemical Company
Hutham S. Olayan*
Chairman
The Olayan Group
James W. Owens*
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer
Caterpillar Inc.
Martha E. Pollack
President
Cornell University
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer
IBM
Joseph R. Swedish
Senior Advisor and  
Retired Chairman, President  
and Chief Executive Officer
Anthem, Inc.
Sidney Taurel
Chairman Emeritus
Eli Lilly and Company
Chairman
Pearson plc 
Peter R. Voser
Retired Chief Executive Officer
Royal Dutch Shell plc
Chairman
ABB Ltd.
Frederick H. Waddell
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer
Northern Trust Corporation
*	 Term on the Board ends on April 30, 2019
**	Retiring from the Company on March 31, 2019


===== PAGE 153 =====
International Business Machines Corporation 
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504 
(914) 499-1900
AIX, Aperto, AppScan, BigFix, Bluewolf, Cognitive Enterprise, Db2, Domino, 
Global Business Services, Global Technology Services, IBM, IBM Cloud,  
IBM Garage, IBM iX, IBM Q, IBM Q Network, IBM Research, IBM Services, 
IBM Watson, IBM Z, Notes, POWER, POWER9, Promontory, P-TECH, Resilient, 
Sanovi, The Weather Company, Unica, Ustream, Watson, Watson Health, 
Watson IoT, Watson OpenScale, z14, z/OS and z Systems are trademarks or 
registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation or its 
wholly owned subsidiaries. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds 
in the United States, other countries, or both. UNIX is a registered trademark 
of the Open Group in the United States and other countries. Other company, 
product and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on papers harvested to  
sustainable standards.
Printed in the U.S.A.    COL03002-USEN-18
Printing: RR Donnelley


===== PAGE 154 =====
